 Cyrus McCormick invented the first
mechanical reaper which could cut in one day as much as five
men could cut with cradles and 16 men with sickles. By the early
twentieth century, most farmers were using combined harvesters
to cut grain. With one of these machines, 500 acres of wheat could
be harvested in two weeks.
For the big farmers of the Great Plains these machines had many
attractions. The prices of wheat were high and the demand seemed
limitless. The new machines allowed these big farmers to rapidly
clear large tracts, break up the soil, remove the grass and prepare
the ground for cultivation. The work could be done quickly and
with a minimal number of hands. With power-driven machinery,
four men could plough, seed and harvest 2,000 to 4,000 acres of
wheat in a season.
2.4 What Happened to the Poor?
For the poorer farmers, machines brought misery. Many of them
bought these machines, imagining that wheat prices would remain
high and profits would flow in. If they had no money, the banks
offered loans. Those who borrowed found it difficult to pay back
their debts. Many of them deserted their farms and looked for
jobs elsewhere.
But jobs were difficult to find. Mechanisation had reduced the
need for labour. And the boom of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries seemed to have come to an end by the mid-
1920s. After that, most farmers faced trouble. Production had
expanded so rapidly during the war and post-war years that that
there was a large surplus. Unsold stocks piled up, storehouses
overflowed with grain, and vast amounts of corn and wheat were
turned into animal feed. Wheat prices fell and export markets
collapsed. This created the grounds for the Great Agrarian
Depression of the 1930s that ruined wheat farmers everywhere.
2.5 Dust Bowl
The expansion of wheat agriculture in the Great Plains created
other problems. In the 1930s, terrifying duststorms began to blow
over the southern plains. Black blizzards rolled in, very often 7,000
to 8,000 feet high, rising like monstrous waves of muddy water.
They came day after day, year after year, through the 1930s. As
Fig.16 – Black blizzard in Western Kansas,
14 April 1935.
129Fig.17 – Drought Survivors. Painted by Alexander Hogue, (1936).
Hogue dramatised the tragic scenes of death and destruction that he
saw, in a series of paintings. Life Magazine referred to Hogue as the
artist of the dust bowl.
the skies darkened, and the dust swept in, people were blinded and
choked. Cattle were suffocated to death, their lungs caked with
dust and mud. Sand buried fences, covered fields, and coated the
surfaces of rivers till the fish died. Dead bodies of birds and animals
were strewn all over the landscape. Tractors and machines that had
ploughed the earth and harvested the wheat in the 1920s were now
clogged with dust, damaged beyond repair.
What had gone wrong? Why these duststorms? In part they came
because the early 1930s were years of persistent drought. The rains
failed year after year, and temperatures soared. The wind blew with
ferocious speed. But ordinary duststorms became black blizzards
only because the entire landscape had been ploughed over, stripped
of all grass that held it together. When wheat cultivation had
expanded dramatically in the early twentieth century, zealous farmers
had recklessly uprooted all vegetation, and tractors had turned the
soil over, and broken the sod into dust. The whole region had become
a dust bowl. The American dream of a land of plenty had turned
into a nightmare. The settlers had thought that they could conquer
the entire landscape, turn all land over to growing crops that could
yield profits. After the 1930s, they realized that they had to respect
the ecological conditions of each region.
1303 The Indian Farmer and Opium Production
Let us now move to India and see what was happening in the Indian
countryside in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
As you know, British rule was gradually established in India after the
Battle of Plassey (1757). Over the period of colonial rule, the rural
landscape was radically transformed. The British saw land revenue as a
major source of government income. To build the resources of the state,
efforts were made to impose a regular system of land revenue, increase
revenue rates, and expand the area under cultivation. As cultivation
expanded, the area under forests and pastures declined. All this created
many problems for peasants and pastoralists. They found their access to
forests and grazing lands increasingly restricted by rules and regulations.
And they struggled to meet the pressures of government revenue demand.
In the colonial period, rural India also came to produce a range of crops
for the world market. In the early nineteenth century, indigo and opium
were two of the major commercial crops. By the end of the century,
peasants were producing sugarcane, cotton, jute, wheat and several other
crops for export, to feed the population of urban Europe and to supply
the mills of Lancashire and Manchester in England.
How did Indian cultivators respond to their entry into the modern
world of international commerce and trade? Let us look at the history
of one crop – opium – to get an idea of what colonial rule meant to
peasants, and how the market operated in the colonies.
3.1 A Taste for Tea: The Trade with China
The history of opium production in India was linked up with the story
of British trade with China. In the late eighteenth century, the English
East India Company was buying tea and silk from China for sale in
England. As tea became a popular English drink, the tea trade became
more and more important. In 1785, about 15 million pounds of tea was
being imported into England. By 1830, the figure had jumped to over
30 million pounds. In fact, the profits of the East India Company came
to depend on the tea trade.
This created a problem. England at this time produced nothing
that could be easily sold in China. The Confucian rulers of China,
the Manchus, were suspicious of all foreign merchants. They feared
that the merchants would meddle in local politics and disrupt their
131authority. So the Manchus were unwilling to allow the entry of
foreign goods.
In such a situation, how could Western merchants finance the tea
trade? How could they balance their trade? They could buy tea only
by paying in silver coins or bullion. This meant an outflow of treasure
from England, a prospect that created widespread anxiety. It was
believed that a loss of treasure would impoverish the nation and deplete
its wealth. Merchants therefore looked for ways to stop this loss of
silver. They searched for a commodity they could sell in China,
something they could persuade the Chinese to buy.
Opium was such a commodity. The Portuguese had introduced
opium into China in the early sixteenth century. Opium was however,
known primarily for its medical properties and used in miniuscule
quantities for certain types of medicines. The Chinese were aware of
the dangers of opium addiction, and the Emperor had forbidden its
production and sale except for medicinal purposes. But Western
merchants in the mid-eighteenth century began an illegal trade in
opium. It was unloaded in a number of sea ports of south-eastern
China and carried by local agents to the interiors. By the early 1820s,
about 10,000 crates were being annually smuggled into China. Fifteen
years later, over 35,000 crates were being unloaded every year.
Fig.18 – The triangular trade.
The British traders took opium from India to
China and tea from China to England. Between
India and England trade flowed both ways. By
the early 19th century, exports of handlooms
from India declined while the export of raw
materials (silk and cotton) and foodgrains
increased. From England, manufactured goods
flowed into India leading to a decline of Indian
artisanal production.
While the English cultivated a taste for Chinese tea, the Chinese
became addicted to opium. People of all classes took to the drug –
shopkeepers and peddlers, officials and army men, aristocrats and
paupers. Lin Ze-xu, Special Commissioner at Canton in 1839,
estimated that there were over 4 million opium smokers in China.
132
Activity
On the arrows in the map indicate the
commodities that flowed from one country to
another.Fig.19 – A ship arrives from China.
This is a painting by Thomas Daniell, an English artist who came to India with his nephew William Daniell in 1786.
The Daniells went first to China, stayed there for while, and then sailed from Canton (in south China) to India. The
ship in which they came was registered in an Indian port and was engaged in trade in Eastern waters. The illegal trade
in opium with China was carried on, in such ships.
Source E
In 1839, the Chinese Emperor sent Lin Ze-xu to Canton as a Special Commissioner
with instructions to stop the opium trade. After he arrived in Canton in the spring of
1839, Lin arrested 1, 600 men involved in the trade, and confiscated 11,000 pounds
of opium. Then he forced the foreign factories to hand over their stocks of opium,
burnt 20, 000 crates of opium and blew the ashes to the wind. When he announced
that Canton was closed to foreign trade, Britain declared war. Defeated in the Opium
War (1837-42) , the Chinese were forced to accept the humiliating terms of the
subsequent treaties, legalizing opium trade and opening up China to foreign
merchants.
Before the war, Lin wrote a strong letter to Queen Victoria criticizing the trade in
opium. Here is an extract from Lin’s “Letter of Advice to Queen Victoria”
Source: From Ssuyu Teng and John Fairbank, China’s Response to the West (1954).
We find your country is sixty or seventy thousand li [three li make one mile, ordinarily]
from China. Yet there are barbarian ships that strive to come here for trade for the
purpose of making a great profit. The wealth of China is used to profit the barbarians.
That is to say, the great profit made by barbarians is all taken from the rightful share
of China. By what right do they then in return us the poisonous drug to injure the
Chinese people?...Let us ask, where is your conscience? I have heard that the smoking
of opium is very strictly forbidden by your country; that is because the harm caused
by opium is clearly understood. Since it is not permitted to do harm to your own
country, then even less should you let it be passed on to the harm of other countries
— how much less to China!’
‘All those people in China who sell opium or smoke opium should receive the death
penalty. We trace the crime of those barbarians who through the years have been
selling opium, then the deep harm they have wrought and the great profit they have
usurped should fundamentally justify their execution according to law. ...
133A British doctor in Canton put the figure at 12 million. As China
became a country of opium addicts, British trade in tea flourished.
The returns from opium sale financed the tea purchases in China.
Activity
Imagine that you were asked by the Emperor
of China to prepare a leaflet for young people
3.2 Where did Opium come from?
This is where the Indian peasants come into the story.
When the British conquered Bengal, they made a determined effort
to produce opium in the lands under their control. As the market
for opium expanded in China, larger volumes of opium flowed out
of Bengal ports. Before 1767, no more than 500 chests (of two
maunds each) were being exported from India. Within four years,
the quantity trebled. A hundred years later, in 1870, the government
was exporting about 50,000 chests annually.
Supplies had to be increased to feed this booming export trade. But
this was not easy. How could the cultivators be persuaded to grow
opium? For a variety of reasons, they were unwilling to turn their
fields over to poppy. First, the crop had to be grown on the best
land, on fields that lay near villages and were well manured. On this
land peasants usually produced pulses. If they planted opium on this
land, then pulses could not be grown there, or they would have to
be grown on inferior land where harvests were poorer and uncertain.
Second, many cultivators owned no land. To cultivate, they had to
pay rent and lease land from landlords. And the rent charged on
good lands near villages was very high. Third, the cultivation of opium
was a difficult process. The plant was delicate, and cultivators had to
spend long hours nurturing it. This meant that they did not have
enough time to care for other crops. Finally, the price the government
paid to the cultivators for the opium they produced was very low. It
was unprofitable for cultivators to grow opium at that price.
3.3 How Were Unwilling Cultivators Made to Produce Opium?
Unwilling cultivators were made to produce opium through a system
of advances. In the rural areas of Bengal and Bihar, there were large
numbers of poor peasants. They never had enough to survive. It was
difficult for them to pay rent to the landlord or to buy food and
clothing. From the 1780s, such peasants found their village headmen
(mahato) giving them money advances to produce opium. When
offered a loan, the cultivators were tempted to accept, hoping to
134
about the harmful effects of opium. Find out
about the effect of opium on the human body.
Design your leaflet and give it an eye-
catching title
New words
Maund – A measure of weight.
1 maund = 40 seers. 1 seer is a little
under a kg.
Activity
Imagine that you are the leader of a group of
farmers protesting against having to grow
opium. You have been granted a meeting
with the local official of the East India
Company. How would the conversation
proceed? Divide the class into the two
groups and act out the conversation you
would have.meet their immediate needs and pay back the loan at a later stage.
But the loan tied the peasant to the headman and through him to the
government. It was the government opium agents who were advancing
the money to the headmen, who in turn gave it to the cultivators. By
taking the loan, the cultivator was forced to grow opium on a specified
area of land and hand over the produce to the agents once the crop
had been harvested. He had no option of planting the field with a
crop of his choice or of selling his produce to anyone but the
government agent. And he had to accept the low price offered for
the produce.
The problem could have been partly solved by increasing the price
of opium. But the government was reluctant to do so. It wanted to
produce opium at a cheap rate and sell it at a high price to opium
agents in Calcutta, who then shipped it to China. This difference
between the buying and selling price was the government’s opium
revenue. The prices given to the peasants were so low that by the
early eighteenth century angry peasants began agitating for higher
prices and refused to take advances. In regions around Benaras,
cultivators began giving up opium cultivation. They produced
sugarcane and potatoes instead. Many cultivators sold off their crop
to travelling traders (pykars) who offered higher prices.
Source F
The Deputy Opium Agent of Allahabad
wrote in 1833:
‘The Board appears to think that the
cultivators are not unwilling to cultivate.
For two years past I have had constant
communications with the cultivators in
some of the districts south of the Jumna
and state positively the people are
discontented and dissatisfied almost to
a man. I have made many enquires on
the subject and the impression left on
my mind is that cultivation of the poppy
is considered a curse by the people and
that only by undue authority is it upheld
... The cultivation was introduced at the
request, nay I may say, at the command
of the Collector; ... The people tell me,
they are ill used and abused and even
beaten by the chuprassies ... The people
almost uniformly told, they suffered loss
from poppy ...’
From Benoy Chowdhury, Growth of
Commercial Agriculture in Bengal.
By 1773, the British government in Bengal had established a
monopoly to trade in opium. No one else was legally permitted to
trade in the product. By the 1820s, the British found to their horror
that opium production in their territories was rapidly declining, but
its production outside the British territories was increasing. It was
being produced in Central India and Rajasthan, within princely states
that were not under British control. In these regions, local traders
were offering much higher prices to peasants and exporting opium
to China. In fact, armed bands of traders were found carrying on
the trade in the 1820s. To the British this trade was illegal: it was
smuggling and it had to be stopped. Government monopoly had to
be retained. It therefore instructed its agents posted in the princely
states to confiscate all opium and destroy the crops.
This conflict between the British government, peasants and local
traders continued as long as opium production lasted.
We should not however, think that the experiences of all peasants in
colonial India were like those of the opium cultivators. We will read
about other experiences of peasants in colonial India in a later chapter.
135Conclusion
In this chapter you saw how rural areas in different parts of the
world changed in the modern period. While looking at these changes
we must remember that their pattern was not the same everywhere.
All sections of rural people were not affected in the same way. Some
gained, others lost. Nor was the history of modernisation simply a
glorious story of growth and development. It was also a story of
displacements and impoverishment, ecological crises and social
rebellion, colonisation and repression. We need to look at these
variations and strands to understand the diverse ways in which
peasants and farmers confronted the modern world.
Fig.20 – Packed chests of opium being taken to Ghazipur railway station in the nineteenth century.
136Activities
1. Draw a timeline from 1650 to1930 showing the significant agricultural changes
which you have read about in this chapter.
2. Fill in the following table with the events outlined in this chapter. Remember,
there could be more than one change in a country.
COUNTRY
CHANGE WHICH
OCCURRED
WHO LOST
WHO WON
Questions
1. Explain briefly what the open field system meant to rural people in eighteenth-
century England.
Look at the system from the point of view of :
A rich farmer
A labourer
A peasant woman
2. Explain briefly the factors which led to the enclosures in England.
?
3. Why were threshing machines opposed by the poor in England?
4. Who was Captain Swing? What did the name symbolise or represent?
5. What was the impact of the westward expansion of settlers in the USA?
6. What were the advantages and disadvantages of the use of mechanical
harvesting machines in the USA?
7. What lessons can we draw from the conversion of the countryside in the USA
from a bread basket to a dust bowl?
8. Write a paragraph on why the British insisted on farmers growing opium in
India.
9. Why were Indian farmers reluctant to grow opium?
137138
SECTION III
Section III will introduce you to the history of everyday life. In this section you will
read about the history of sports and clothing.
History is not just about the dramatic events in the world. It is equally about the
small things in our lives. Everything around us has a history – the clothes we wear,
the food we eat, the music we hear, the medicines we use, the literature we read, the
games we play. All these have evolved over time. Since we relate to them in our daily
lives, their history escapes us. We never pause to think what things were like a
century ago; or how people in different societies see these everyday things – food
and clothing for instance – differently.
Chapter VII is on History and Sports. You will study this history through the story
of one game that in India has captured the imagination of the nation for some decades.
News of cricket today hits the headline of newspapers. Cricket matches are organised
to establish friendship between nations and cricketers are seen as ambassadors of the
country. The game has, in fact, come to represent the unity of India. But did you
know that this was not always so? This chapter will tell you about the long and
chequered history of the game.
Cricket
EVERYDAY LIFE, CULTURE AND POLITICS
At one time, a century and half ago, cricket was an English game. It had been invented
in England and became intimately linked to the culture of nineteenth century
Victorian society. The game was expected to represent all that the English valued –
fair play, discipline, gentlemanliness. It was introduced in schools as part of a wider
programme of physical training through which boys were to be moulded into ideal
citizens. Girls were not to play games meant for boys. With the British, cricket
spread to the colonies. There again it was supposed to uphold the values of Englishness.
139The colonial masters assumed that only they could play the game as it ought to be
played, in its true spirit. They were, in fact, worried when the inhabitants of the
colonies not only began to play the game, but often played it better than the masters;
and at times beat the English at their own game. The game of cricket thus got linked up
closely with the politics of colonialism and nationalism.
Within the colonies the game had a complex history. As Chapter VII will show, it was
connected to the politics of caste and region, community and nation. The emergence of
cricket as a national game was the result of many decades of historical development.
From cricket you will move to clothing (Chapter VIII). You will see how a history of
clothing can tell us so much about the history of societies. The clothes people wear are
shaped by the rules and norms of societies. They reflect people’s sense of beauty and
honour, their notions of proper conduct and behavior. As societies change, these norms
alter. But these changes in the norms of society and styles of clothing come about as a
consequence of long years of struggle. They have a history. They do not just
happen naturally.
Chapter VIII will introduce you to this history. It will show how the shifts in clothing
in England and India were shaped by the social movements within these societies, and
by changes within the economy. You will see how clothing too, is deeply connected to
the politics of colonialism and nationalism, caste and class. A look at the history of
clothing helps us discover new layers of meaning in the politics of Swadeshi and the
symbol of the charkha. It even helps us understand Mahatma Gandhi better, for he was
one individual who was highly sensitive to the politics of clothing, and wrote
extensively on it.
Once you see the history behind one or two such issues, you may begin to ask historical
questions about other such aspects of ordinary life which you have taken for granted.
140History and Sport:
The Story of Cricket
Fig.1 – The oldest cricket bat in existence.
Note the curved end, similar to a hockey
stick.
Cricket grew out of the many stick-and-ball games played in England
500 years ago, under a variety of different rules. The word ‘bat’ is an old
English word that simply means stick or club. By the seventeenth century,
cricket had evolved enough to be recognisable as a distinct game and it
was popular enough for its fans to be fined for playing it on Sunday
instead of going to church. Till the middle of the eighteenth century, bats
were roughly the same shape as hockey sticks, curving outwards at the
bottom. There was a simple reason for this: the ball was bowled underarm,
along the ground and the curve at the end of the bat gave the batsman
the best chance of making contact.
Sport:
Cricket
How that early version of cricket played in village England grew into
the modern game played in giant stadiums in great cities is a proper
subject for history because one of the uses of history is to understand
how the present was made. And sport is a large part of contemporary
life: it is one way in which we amuse ourselves, compete with each
other, stay fit, and express our social loyalties. If tens of millions of
Indians today drop everything to watch the Indian team play a Test
match or a one-day international, it is reasonable for a history of India
to explore how that stick-and-ball game invented in south-eastern
England became the ruling passion of the Indian sub-continent. This
is particularly so, since the game was linked to the wider history of
colonialism and nationalism and was in part shaped by the politics of
religion and caste.
Our history of cricket will look first at the
evolution of cricket as a game in England,
and discuss the wider culture of physical
training and athleticism of the time. It will
then move to India, discuss the history of
the adoption of cricket in this country, and
trace the modern transformation of the
game. In each of these sections we will see
how the history of the game was connected
to the social history of the time.
Fig.2 — An artist’s sketch of the cricket ground at Lord’s in England
in 1821.
1411 The H istorical D evelopment of C ricket
as a G ame in England
The social and economic history of England in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, cricket’s early years, shaped the game and gave
cricket its unique nature.
For example, one of the peculiarities of Test cricket is that a match
can go on for five days and still end in a draw. No other modern
team sport takes even half as much time to complete. A football
match is generally over in an hour-and-a-half of playing time. Even
baseball, a long-drawn-out bat-and-ball game by the standards of
modern sport, completes nine innings in less than half the time that
it takes to play a limited-overs match, the shortened version of
modern cricket!
Another curious characteristic of cricket is that the length of the
pitch is specified – 22 yards – but the size or shape of the ground is
not. Most other team sports, such as hockey and football lay down
the dimensions of the playing area: cricket does not. Grounds can be
oval like the Adelaide Oval or nearly circular, like Chepauk in
Chennai. A six at the Melbourne Cricket Ground needs to clear
much more ground than a lofted shot for the same reward at Feroz
Shah Kotla in Delhi.
There’s a historical reason behind both these oddities. Cricket was
the earliest modern team sport to be codified, which is another way
of saying that cricket gave itself rules and regulations so that it could
be played in a uniform and standardised way
well before team games like soccer and hockey.
The first written ‘Laws of Cricket’ were drawn
up in 1744. They stated, ‘the principals shall
choose from amongst the gentlemen present two
umpires who shall absolutely decide all disputes.
The stumps must be 22 inches high and the bail
across them six inches. The ball must be between
5 and 6 ounces, and the two sets of stumps 22
yards apart’. There were no limits on the shape
or size of the bat. It appears that 40 notches or
runs was viewed as a very big score, probably
due to the bowlers bowling quickly at shins
unprotected by pads. The world’s first cricket
club was formed in Hambledon in the 1760s Fig.3 – The pavilion of the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) in 1874.
142and the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in 1787. In
1788, the MCC published its first revision of the laws and became
the guardian of cricket’s regulations.
The MCC’s revision of the laws brought in a series of changes in
the game that occurred in the second half of the eighteenth century.
During the 1760s and 1770s it became common to pitch the ball
through the air, rather than roll it along the ground. This change
gave bowlers the options of length, deception through the air, plus
increased pace. It also opened new possibilities for spin and swing.
In response, batsmen had to master timing and shot selection. One
immediate result was the replacement of the curved bat with the
straight one. All of this raised the premium on skill and reduced
the influence of rough ground and brute force.
The weight of the ball was limited to between 51⁄2 to 53⁄4 ounces,
and the width of the bat to four inches. The latter ruling followed
an innings by a batsman who appeared with a bat as wide as the
wicket! In 1774, the first leg-before law was published. Also around
this time, a third stump became common. By 1780, three days had
become the length of a major match, and this year also saw the
creation of the first six-seam cricket ball.
Fig.4 – The laws of cricket drawn up and
revised by the MCC were regularly published in
this form. Note that norms of betting were also
formalised.
Cricket
While many important changes occurred during the nineteenth
century (the rule about wide balls was applied, the exact
circumference of the ball was specified, protective equipment like
pads and gloves became available, boundaries were introduced where
previously all shots had to be run and, most importantly, over-
arm bowling became legal) cricket remained a pre-industrial sport
that matured during the early phase of the Industrial Revolution,
the late eighteenth century. This history has made cricket a game
with characteristics of both the past and the present day.
Cricket’s connection with a rural past can be seen in the length of
a Test match. Originally, cricket matches had no time limit. The
game went on for as long as it took to bowl out a side twice. The
rhythms of village life were slower and cricket’s rules were made
before the Industrial Revolution. Modern factory work meant that
people were paid by the hour or the day or the week: games that
were codified after the industrial revolution, like football and
hockey, were strictly time-limited to fit the routines of industrial
city life. New words
In the same way, cricket’s vagueness about the size of a cricket
ground is a result of its village origins. Cricket was originally played Codified – Made into a formalised system
with clearly established rules and laws
143on country commons, unfenced land that was public property.
The size of the commons varied from one village to another, so
there were no designated boundaries or boundary hits. When the
ball went into the crowd, the crowd cleared a way for the fieldsman
to retrieve it. Even after boundaries were written into the laws of
cricket, their distance from the wicket was not specified. The laws
simply lay down that ‘the umpire shall agree with both captains on
the boundaries of the playing area’.
If you look at the game’s equipment, you can see how cricket both
changed with changing times and yet fundamentally remained true to
its origins in rural England. Cricket’s most important tools are all made
of natural, pre-industrial materials. The bat is made of wood as are
the stumps and the bails. The ball is made with leather, twine and
cork. Even today both bat and ball are handmade, not industrially
manufactured. The material of the bat changed slightly over time. Once
it was cut out of a single piece of wood. Now it consists of two pieces,
the blade which is made out of the wood of the willow tree and the
handle which is made out of cane that became available as European
colonialists and trading companies established themselves in Asia.
Unlike golf and tennis, cricket has refused to remake its tools with
industrial or man-made materials: plastic, fibre glass and metal have
been firmly rejected. Australian cricketer Dennis Lillee tried to play an
innings with an aluminium bat, only to have it outlawed by the umpires.
But in the matter of protective equipment, cricket has been influenced
by technological change. The invention of vulcanised rubber led to
the introduction of pads in 1848 and protective gloves soon afterwards,
and the modern game would be unimaginable without helmets made
out of metal and synthetic lightweight materials.
Fig.6 – The legendary batsman W.G. Grace coming out to bat at Lord’s
in 1895.
He was playing for the Gentlemen against the Players.
144
Fig.5 – This poster announces a match at
Lord’s in 1848.
It shows the difference between the amateurs
and the professionals by calling the two sides
the Gentlemen and the Players.
Advertisements for nineteenth century
matches looked like theatre posters suggesting
the dramatic nature of the game.1.1 Cricket and Victorian England
New words
The organisation of cricket in England reflected the nature of English
society. The rich who could afford to play it for pleasure were called
amateurs and the poor who played it for a living were called
professionals. The rich were amateurs for two reasons. One, they
considered sport a kind of leisure. To play for the pleasure of playing
and not for money was an aristocratic value. Two, there was not
enough money in the game for the rich to be interested. The wages
of professionals were paid by patronage or subscription or gate
money. The game was seasonal and did not offer employment the
year round. Most professionals worked as miners or in other forms
of working class employment in winter, the off-season.
Patronage – Agreement by wealthy
supporter to give financial support for a
specific cause
Subscription – Collected financial
contribution for a specific purpose (such as
cricket)
The social superiority of amateurs was built into the customs of
cricket. Amateurs were called Gentlemen while professionals had to
be content with being described as Players. They even entered the
ground from different entrances. Amateurs tended to be batsmen,
Source A
Thomas Hughes (1822-1896) studied at Rugby School during the headmastership of Thomas Arnold.
Based on his school experience, he wrote a novel, Tom Brown’s Schooldays. The book, published in 1857,
became popular and helped spread the ideas of what came to be called muscular Christianity that believed
that healthy citizens had to be moulded through Christian ideals and sports.
In this book Tom Brown is transformed from a nervous, homesick, timid boy into a robust, manly student.
He becomes a heroic figure recognised for his physical courage, sportsmanship, loyalty and patriotism.
This transformation is brought about by the discipline of the public school and the culture of sports.
‘Come, none of your irony, Brown,’ answers the master. ‘I’m beginning to understand the game scientifically.
What a noble game it is, too!’
‘Isn’t it? But it’s more than a game. It’s an institution,’ said Tom.
‘Yes,’ said Arthur, ‘the birthright of British boys old and young, as habeas corpus and trial by jury are of
British men.’
‘The discipline and reliance on one another which it teaches is so valuable, I think,’ went on the master,
‘it ought to be such an unselfish game. It merges the individual in the eleven; he doesn’t play that he may
win, but that his side may.’
‘That’s very true,’ said Tom, ‘and that’s why football and cricket, now one comes to think of it, are such much
better games than fives’ or hare-and-hounds, or any others where the object is to come in first or to win for
oneself, and not that one’s side may win.’
‘And then the Captain of the eleven!’ said the master, ‘what a post is his in our School-world!...requiring skill
and gentleness and firmness, and I know not what other rare qualities.’
Extract from Tom Brown’s Schooldays by Thomas Hughes
145
Cricket
——EXTRACT——leaving the energetic, hardworking aspects of the game, like fast
bowling, to the professionals. That is partly why the laws of the
game always give the benefit of the doubt to the batsman. Cricket is
a batsman’s game because its rules were made to favour ‘Gentlemen’,
who did most of the batting. The social superiority of the amateur
was also the reason the captain of a cricket team was traditionally a
batsman: not because batsmen were naturally better captains but
because they were generally Gentlemen. Captains of teams, whether
club teams or national sides, were always amateurs. It was not till the
1930s that the English Test team was led by a professional, the
Yorkshire batsman, Len Hutton.
It’s often said that the ‘battle of Waterloo was won on the playing
fields of Eton’. This means that Britain’s military success was based
on the values taught to schoolboys in its public schools. Eton was
the most famous of these schools. The English boarding school was
the institution that trained English boys for careers in the military,
the civil service and the church, the three great institutions of imperial
England. By the beginning of the nineteenth century, men like
Thomas Arnold, headmaster of the famous Rugby School and
founder of the modern public school system, saw team sport like
cricket and rugby not just as outdoor play, but as an organised way
of teaching English boys the discipline, the importance of hierarchy,
the skills, the codes of honour and the leadership qualities that helped
them build and run the British empire. Victorian empire builders
justified the conquest of other countries as an act of unselfish social
service, by which backward peoples were introduced to the civilising
influence of British law and Western knowledge. Cricket helped to
confirm this self-image of the English elite by glorifying the amateur
ideal, where cricket was played not for victory or profit, but for its
own sake, in the spirit of fair play.
In actual fact the Napoleonic wars were won because of the economic
contribution of the iron works of Scotland and Wales, the mills of
Lancashire and the financial houses of the City of London. It was
the English lead in trade and industry that made Britain the world’s
greatest power, but it suited the English ruling class to believe that it
was the superior character of its young men, built in boarding schools,
playing gentlemanly games like cricket, that tipped the balance.
New words
Hierarchy – Organised by rank and status
146
Fig.7 – A cricket match at Lord’s between the
famous public schools Eton and Harrow.
While the game itself would look similar
wherever it is played, the crowd does not.
Notice how the upper-class social character
of the game is brought out by the focus on
gentlemen in bowler hats and ladies with their
parasols shading them from the sun.
From Illustrated London News,
July 20 1872.Fig.8 – Croquet, not cricket, for women.
Sports for women was not designed as vigorous, competitive exercise. Croquet was a slow-paced, elegant game
considered suitable for women, especially of the upper class. The players’ flowing gowns, frills and hats show the
character of women’s sports. From Illustrated London News, 20 July, 1872.
Source B
Sport for girls?
Cricket
Till the last part of the nineteenth century, sports and vigorous
exercise for girls was not a part of their education. Dorothea
Beale, principal of Cheltenham Ladies College from 1858 to 1906,
reported to the schools Enquiry Commission in 1864:
‘The vigorous exercise which boys get from cricket, etc., must
be supplied in the case of girls by walking and ... skipping.’
From: Kathleen, E. McCrone, ‘Play up! Play up! And Play the Game:
Sport at the Late Victorian Girls Public School’.
By the 1890s, school began acquiring playgrounds and allowing
girls to play some of the games earlier considered male
preserves. But the competition was still discouraged. Dorothea
Beale told the school council in 1893-1894:
‘I am most anxious that girls should not over-exert themselves,
or become absorbed in athletic rivalries, and therefore we do
not play against the other schools. I think it is better for girls to
learn to take an interest in botany, geology etc., and not make
country excursions.’
From: Kathleen, E. McCrone, ‘Play up! Play up! And Play the Game’.
Activity
What does the sports curriculum of a
nineteenth century girls’ school tell us about
the behaviour considered proper for girls at
that time?
1472 The S pread of C ricket
While some English team games like hockey and football became
international games, played all over the world, cricket remained a
colonial game, limited to countries that had once been part of the
British empire. The pre-industrial oddness of cricket made it a hard game
to export. It took root only in countries that the British conquered and
ruled. In these colonies, cricket was established as a popular sport either
by white settlers (as in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Australia, New Zealand,
the West Indies and Kenya) or by local elites who wanted to copy the
habits of their colonial masters, as in India.
Fig.9 – An afternoon of tennis in the plains of colonial India.
Notice how the artist tries to show that the game was for recreation as
well as exercise. Men and women could play games together for
recreation not competition.
From: Graphic, February 1880.
While British imperial officials brought the
game to the colonies, they made little effort
to spread the game, especially in colonial
territories where the subjects of empire were
mainly non-white, such as India and the
West Indies. Here, playing cricket became a
sign of superior social and racial status, and
the Afro-Caribbean population was
discouraged from participating in organised
club cricket, which remained dominated by
white plantation owners and their servants.
The first non-white club in the West Indies
was established towards the end of the
nineteenth century, and even in this case its
members were light-skinned mulattos. So
while black people played an enormous
New words
Fig.10 – A leisurely game for recreation, being played against the backdrop of
the Himalayas.
The only Indians in the picture seem to be the servants seen near the pavilion.
148
Mulattos – People of mixed European and
African descentamount of informal cricket on beaches, in back alleys
and parks, club cricket till as late as the 1930s was
dominated by white elites.
Cricket fans know that watching a match involves taking sides. In a
Ranji Trophy match when Delhi plays Mumbai, the loyalty of
spectators depends on which city they come from or support. When
India plays Australia, the spectators watching the match on television
in Bhopal or Chennai feel involved as Indians – they are moved by
nationalist loyalties. But through the early history of Indian first-
class cricket, teams were not organised on geographical principles
and it was not till 1932 that a national team was given the right to
represent India in a Test match. So how were teams organised and,
in the absence of regional or national teams, how did cricket fans
choose sides? We turn to history for answers, to discover how cricket
in India developed and to get a sense of the loyalties that united and
divided Indians in the days of the Raj.
Fig.12 – Learie Constantine.
One of the best-known
cricketers of the West
Indies.
2.1 Cricket, Race and Religion
New words
Cricket in colonial India was organised on the principle of race and
religion. The first record we have of cricket being played in India is
from 1721, an account of recreational cricket played by English sailors
Dominion – Self-governing areas under
the control of the British crown
149
Cricket
Despite the exclusiveness of the white cricket elite
in the West Indies, the game became hugely popular
in the Caribbean. Success at cricket became a measure
of racial equality and political progress. At the time
of their independence many of the political leaders
of Caribbean countries like Forbes Burnham and
Eric Williams saw in the game a chance for self-
respect and international standing. When the West
Fig.11 – A rough-and-ready cricket game being played by
Indies won its first Test series against England in Indians in a village in the Himalayas (1894).
1950, it was celebrated as a national achievement, as In contrast to Figure 10, notice the home-made wickets and bat,
carved out of rough bits of wood.
a way of demonstrating that West Indians were the
equals of white Englishmen. There were two ironies to this great
victory. One, the West Indian team that won was captained by a
white player. The first time a black player led the West Indies Test
team was in 1960 when Frank Worrell was named captain. And two,
the West Indies cricket team represented not one nation but several
dominions that later became independent countries. The pan-West
Indian team that represents the Caribbean region in international
Test cricket is the only exception to a series of unsuccessful efforts to
bring about West Indian unification.in Cambay. The first Indian club, the Calcutta Cricket Club, was
established in 1792. Through the eighteenth century, cricket in India
was almost wholly a sport played by British military men and civil
servants in all-white clubs and gymkhanas. Playing cricket in the
privacy of these clubs was more than just fun: it was also an escape
from the strangeness, discomfort and danger of their stay in India.
Indians were considered to have no talent for the game and certainly
not meant to play it. But they did.
The origins of Indian cricket, that is, cricket played by Indians are to
be found in Bombay and the first Indian community to start playing
the game was the small community of Zoroastrians, the Parsis.
Brought into close contact with the British because of their interest
in trade and the first Indian community to westernise, the Parsis
founded the first Indian cricket club, the Oriental Cricket Club in
Bombay in 1848. Parsi clubs were funded and sponsored by Parsi
businessmen like the Tatas and the Wadias. The white cricket elite in
India offered no help to the enthusiastic Parsis. In fact, there was a
quarrel between the Bombay Gymkhana, a whites-only club, and
Parsi cricketers over the use of a public park. The Parsis complained
that the park was left unfit for cricket because the polo ponies of the
Bombay Gymkhana dug up the surface.
When it became clear that the colonial
authorities were prejudiced in favour of
their white compatriots, the Parsis built
their own gymkhana to play cricket in.
The rivalry between the Parsis and the
racist Bombay Gymkhana had a happy
ending for these pioneers of Indian cricket.
A Parsi team beat the Bombay Gymkhana
at cricket in 1889, just four years after the
foundation of the Indian National
Congress in 1885, an organisation that was
lucky to have amongst its early leaders the
great Parsi statesman and intellectual Fig.13 – The Parsi team, the first Indian cricket team to tour England
in 1886.
Dadabhai Naoroji.
Note that along with the traditional cricket flannels, they wear Parsi caps.
The establishment of the Parsi Gymkhana became a precedent for
other Indians who in turn established clubs based on the idea of
religious community. By the 1890s, Hindus and Muslims were busy
gathering funds and support for a Hindu Gymkhana and an Islam
Gymkhana. The British did not consider colonial India as a nation.
They saw it as a collection of castes and races and religious
communities and gave themselves the credit for unifying the sub-
150
New word
Precedent – Previous action which
provides reason to repeat itThis history of gymkhana cricket led to first-class cricket being
organised on communal and racial lines. The teams that played
colonial India’s greatest and most famous first-class cricket tournament
did not represent regions, as teams in today’s Ranji Trophy currently
do, but religious communities. The tournament was initially called
the Quadrangular, because it was played by four teams: the
Europeans, the Parsis, the Hindus and the Muslims. It later became
the Pentangular when a fifth team was added, namely, the Rest, which
comprised all the communities left over, such as the Indian Christians.
For example, Vijay Hazare, a Christian, played for the Rest.
By the late 1930s and early 1940s, journalists, cricketers and political
leaders had begun to criticize the racial and communal foundations
of the Pentangular tournament. The distinguished editor of the
newspaper the Bombay Chronicle, S.A. Brelvi, the famous radio
commentator A.F.S. Talyarkhan and India’s most respected political
figure, Mahatma Gandhi, condemned the Pentangular as a
communally divisive competition that was out of place in a time
when nationalists were trying to unite India’s diverse population. A
rival first-class tournament on regional lines, the National Cricket
Championship (later named the Ranji Trophy), was established but
not until Independence did it properly replace the Pentangular. The
colonial state and its divisive conception of India was the rock on
which the Pentangular was built. It was a colonial tournament and it
died with the Raj.
Box 1
Caste and cricket
Palwankar Baloo was born in Poona in
1875. Born at a time when Indians weren’t
allowed to play Test cricket, he was the
greatest Indian slow bowler of his time.
He played for the Hindus in the
Quadrangular, the major cricket tournament
of the colonial period. Despite being their
greatest player he was never made captain
of the Hindus because he was born a Dalit
and upper-caste selectors discriminated
against him. But his younger brother, Vithal,
a batsman did become captain of the
Hindus in 1923 and led the team to a
famous victory against the Europeans.
Writing to a newspaper a cricket fan made a
connection between the Hindus’ victory and
Gandhiji’s war on ‘untouchability’:
‘The Hindus’ brilliant victory was due more
to the judicious and bold step of the Hindu
Gymkhana in appointing Mr Vithal, brother of
Mr Baloo – premier bowler of India – who is
a member of the Untouchable Class to
captain the Hindu team. The moral that can
be safely drawn from the Hindus’
magnificent victory is that removal of
Untouchability would lead to swaraj – which
is the prophecy of the Mahatma.’
A Corner of a Foreign Field by
Cricket
continent. In the late nineteenth century, many Indian institutions
and movements were organised around the idea of religious
community because the colonial state encouraged these divisions and
was quick to recognise communal institutions. For example, the
Governor of the Bombay Presidency while dealing with an
application from the Islam Gymkhana for land on Bombay’s seafront
wrote: ‘... we can be certain that in a short time we shall get a similar
application from some Hindu Gymkhana ... I don’t see how we are
to refuse these applicants; but I will ... refuse any more grants once a
Gymkhana has been established ... by each nationality’. (emphasis
added). It is obvious from this letter that colonial officials regarded
religious communities as separate nationalities. Applications that used
the communal categories favoured by the colonial state were, as this
letter shows, more likely to be approved.
Ramachandra Guha.
Fig.14 – Palwankar Baloo (1904).
A Dalit, Baloo’s enormous cricketing talent made sure that he could not be
kept out of the team, but he was never allowed to take over as captain.
1513 The M odern T ransformation of the G ame
Modern cricket is dominated by Tests and one-day internationals, played
between national teams. The players who become famous, who live on
in the memories of cricket’s public, are those who have played for their
country. The players Indian fans remember from the era of the
Pentangular and the Quadrangular are those who were fortunate enough
to play Test cricket. C.K. Nayudu, an outstanding Indian batsman of
his time, lives on in the popular imagination when some of his great
contemporaries like Palwankar Vithal and Palwankar Baloo have been
forgotten because his career lasted long enough for him to play Test
cricket for India while theirs did not. Even though Nayudu was past his
Source C
Mahatma Gandhi and colonial sport
Mahatma Gandhi believed that sport was essential for creating a balance between the body and the
mind. However, he often emphasised that games like cricket and hockey were imported into India by
the British and were replacing traditional games. Such games as cricket, hockey, football and tennis
were for the privileged, he believed. They showed a colonial mindset and were a less effective education
than the simple exercise of those who worked on the land.
Read the following three extracts from Mahatma Gandhi’s writing and contrast them to the ideas on
education and sport expressed by Thomas Arnold or Hughes (Source A).
‘Now let us examine our body. Are we supposed to cultivate the body by playing tennis, football or
cricket for an hour every day? It does, certainly, build up the body. Like a wild horse, however, the
body will be strong but not trained. A trained body is healthy, vigorous and sinewy. The hands and
feet can do any desired work. A pickaxe, a shovel, a hammer, etc. are like ornaments to a trained hand
and it can wield them ... A well-trained body does not get tired in trudging 30 miles .... Does the
student acquire such physical culture? We can assert that modern curricula do not impart physical
education in this sense.’
‘What Is Education’, 26 February 1926, The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. 34.
‘I should, however, be exceedingly surprised and even painfully surprised, if I were told that before
cricket and football descended upon your sacred soil, your boys were devoid of all games. If you have
national games, I would urge upon you that yours is an institution that should lead in reviving old
games. I know that we have in India many noble indigenous games just as interesting and exciting as
cricket or football, also as much attended with risks as football is, but with the added advantage that
they are inexpensive, because the cost is practically next to nothing’
Speech at Mahindra College, 24 November 1927, The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi.
‘A sound body means one which bends itself to the spirit and is always a ready instrument at its
service. Such bodies are not made, in my opinion, on the football field. They are made on cornfields
and farms. I would urge you to think this over and you will find innumerable illustrations to prove my
statement. Our colonial-born Indians are carried away with this football and cricket mania. These
games may have their place under certain circumstances .... Why do we not take the simple fact into
consideration that the vast majority of mankind who are vigorous in body and mind are simple
agriculturists, that they are strangers to these games, and they are the salt of the earth?’
Letter to Lazarus, 17 April 1915, The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. 14.
152cricketing prime when he played for India in its first Test matches against
England starting in 1932, his place in India’s cricket history is assured
because he was the country’s first Test captain.
India entered the world of Test cricket in 1932, a decade and a half
before it became an independent nation. This was possible because Test
cricket from its origins in 1877 was organised as a contest between
different parts of the British empire, not sovereign nations. The first
Test was played between England and Australia when Australia was still
a white settler colony, not even a self-governing dominion. Similarly,
the small countries of the Caribbean that together make up the West
Indies team were British colonies till well after the Second World War.
3.1 Decolonisation and Sport
Decolonisation, or the process through which different parts of European
empires became independent nations, began with the independence of
India in 1947 and continued for the next half a century. This process led
to the decline of British influence in trade, commerce, military affairs,
international politics and, inevitably, sporting matters. But this did not
happen at once; it took a while for the relative unimportance of post-
imperial Britain to be reflected in the organisation of world cricket.
The colonial flavour of world cricket during the 1950s and 1960s can be
seen from the fact that England and the other white commonwealth
countries, Australia and New Zealand, continued to play Test cricket
with South Africa, a racist state that practised a policy of racial
segregation which, among other things, barred non-whites (who made
up the majority of South Africa’s population) from representing that
country in Test matches. Test-playing nations like India, Pakistan and
the West Indies boycotted South Africa, but they did not have the
necessary power in the ICC to debar that country from Test cricket.
That only came to pass when the political pressure to isolate South
Africa applied by the newly decolonised nations of Asia and Africa
combined with liberal feeling in Britain and forced the English cricket
authorities to cancel a tour by South Africa in 1970.
New words
Segregation – Separation (of people) on the
basis of colour or race
153
Cricket
Even after Indian independence kick-started the disappearance of the
British empire, the regulation of international cricket remained the
business of the Imperial Cricket Conference ICC. The ICC, renamed the
International Cricket Conference as late as 1965, was dominated by its
foundation members, England and Australia, which retained the right
of veto over its proceedings. Not till 1989 was the privileged position of
England and Australia scrapped in favour of equal membership.4 Commerce, Media and Cricket T oday
The 1970s were the decade in which cricket was transformed: it was a
time when a traditional game evolved to fit a changing world. If 1970
was notable for the exclusion of South Africa from international cricket,
1971 was a landmark year because the first one-day international was
played between England and Australia in Melbourne. The enormous
popularity of this shortened version of the game led to the first World
Cup being successfully staged in 1975. Then in 1977, even as cricket
celebrated 100 years of Test matches, the game was changed forever, not
by a player or cricket administrator, but by a businessman.
Kerry Packer, an Australian television tycoon who saw the money-
making potential of cricket as a televised sport, signed up fifty-one of
the world’s leading cricketers against the wishes of the national cricket
boards and for about two years staged unofficial Tests and One-Day
internationals under the name of World Series Cricket. While Packer’s
‘circus’ as it was then described folded up after two years, the
innovations he introduced during this time to make cricket more
attractive to television audiences endured and changed the nature of
the game.
Coloured dress, protective helmets, field restrictions, cricket under
lights, became a standard part of the post-Packer game. Crucially, Packer
drove home the lesson that cricket was a marketable game, which could
generate huge revenues. Cricket boards became rich by selling television
rights to television companies. Television channels made money by
selling television spots to companies who were happy to pay large
sums of money to air commercials for their products to cricket’s captive
television audience. Continuous television coverage made cricketers
celebrities who, besides being paid better by their cricket boards, now
made even larger sums of money by making commercials for a wide
range of products, from tyres to colas, on television.
Television coverage changed cricket. It expanded the audience for the
game by beaming cricket into small towns and villages. It also broadened
cricket’s social base. Children who had never previously had the chance
to watch international cricket because they lived outside the big cities,
where top-level cricket was played, could now watch and learn by imitating
their heroes.
The technology of satellite television and the world wide reach of
multi-national television companies created a global market for cricket.
154Matches in Sydney could now be watched live in Surat. This simple
fact shifted the balance of power in cricket: a process that had been
begun by the break-up of the British Empire was taken to its logical
conclusion by globalisation. Since India had the largest viewership
for the game amongst the cricket-playing nations and the largest
market in the cricketing world, the game’s centre of gravity shifted
to South Asia. This shift was symbolized by the shifting of the ICC
headquarters from London to tax-free Dubai.
One hundred and fifty years ago the first Indian cricketers, the Parsis,
had to struggle to find an open space to play in. Today, the global
marketplace has made Indian players the best-paid, most famous
cricketers in the game, men for whom the world is a stage. The
history that brought about this transformation was made up of many
smaller changes: the replacement of the gentlemanly amateur by the
paid professional, the triumph of the one-day game as it
overshadowed Test cricket in terms of popularity, and the remarkable
changes in global commerce and technology. The business of history
is to make sense of change over time. In this chapter we have followed
the spread of a colonial sport through its history, and tried to
understand how it adapted to a post-colonial world.
Cricket
A more important sign that the centre of gravity in cricket has shifted
away from the old, Anglo-Australian axis is that innovations in cricket
technique in recent years have mainly come from the practice of sub-
continental teams in countries like India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Pakistan has pioneered two great advances in bowling: the doosra and
the ‘reverse swing’. Both skills were developed in response to sub-
continental conditions: the doosra to counter aggressive batsmen with
heavy modern bats who were threatening to make finger-spin
obsolete and ‘reverse swing’ to move the ball in on dusty, unresponsive
wickets under clear skies. Initially, both innovations were greeted
with great suspicion by countries like Britain and Australia which
saw them as an underhanded, illegal bending of the laws of cricket.
In time, it came to be accepted that the laws of cricket could not
continue to be framed for British or Australian conditions of play,
and they became part of the technique of all bowlers, everywhere in
the world.
New Words
Obsolete – No longer in use
155Box 2
Hockey
Modern hockey evolved from traditional games once current in Britain. Amongst its sporting ancestors, hockey can count the
Scottish game called shinty, the English and Welsh game called bandy and Irish hurling.
Hockey, like many other modern games, was introduced into India by the British army in colonial times. The first hockey club
in India was started in Calcutta in 1885-1886. India was represented in the hockey competition of the Olympic Games for the
first time in 1928. India reached the finals defeating Austria, Belgium, Denmark and Switzerland. In the finals, India defeated
Holland by three goals to nil.
The brilliance and skill of players like the great Dhyan Chand brought India a string of Olympic gold medals. Between 1928
and 1956, India won gold medals in six consecutive Olympic Games. During this golden age of Indian dominance, India
played 24 Olympic matches, and won them all, scored 178 goals (at an average of 7.43 goals per match) and conceded only
seven goals. The two other gold medals for India came in the 1964 Tokyo Olympics and the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
Box 3
Polo
Polo was greatly favoured as a game suitable for military and athletic young men. Following one of the earliest games in
England, a report in the Illustrated London News declared:
‘As an exercise ... for military men this bold and graceful sport is likely to give increased dexterity in the use of the lance
or sabre, or other cavalry weapons, as well as a firmer seat in the saddle, and a faculty of quickly turning to the right hand
or to the left, which must be effective in the melee of battle.’
From: Illustrated London News, 1872.
Fig.15 – Polo Travels West
(From: Illustrated London News, 20 July 1872)
Polo is a Central Asian game that came to
India and was taken west by colonial
officials. Sultan Qutubuddin Aibak died in
1210 A.D. when he slipped from his horse
playing polo.
1561. Imagine a conversation between Thomas Arnold, the headmaster of Rugby
School, and Mahatma Gandhi on the value of cricket in education. What
would each say? Write out a conversation in the form of a dialogue.
2. Find out the history of any one local sport. Ask your parents and grandparents
how this game was played in their childhood. See whether it is played in the
same way now. Try and think of the historical forces that might account for
the changes.
Activities
Questions
1. Test cricket is a unique game in many ways. Discuss some of the ways in
which it is different from other team games. How are the peculiarities of
Test cricket shaped by its historical beginnings as a village game?
2. Describe one way in which in the nineteenth century, technology brought
about a change in equipment and give one example where no change in
equipment took place.
3. Explain why cricket became popular in India and the West Indies. Can you
give reasons why it did not become popular in countries in South America?
?
4. Give brief explanations for the following:
Cricket
The Parsis were the first Indian community to set up a cricket club
in India.
Mahatma Gandhi condemned the Pentangular tournament.
The name of the ICC was changed from the Imperial Cricket
Conference to the International Cricket Conference.
The shift of the ICC headquarters from London to Dubai
5. How have advances in technology, especially television technology, affected
the development of contemporary cricket?
157India and the Contemporary World
Clothing:
A Social History
It is easy to forget that there is a history to the clothes we wear. All
societies observe certain rules, some of them quite strict, about the
way in which men, women and children should dress, or how
different social classes and groups should present themselves. These
norms come to define the identity of people, the way they see
themselves, the way they want others to see them. They shape our
notions of grace and beauty, ideas of modesty and shame. As times
change and societies are transformed, these notions also alter.
Modifications in clothing come to reflect these changes.
The emergence of the modern world is marked by dramatic changes
in clothing. In this chapter, we will look at some of the histories of
clothing in the modern period, that is in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries.
Why are these two centuries important?
History
Social
Before the age of democratic revolutions and the development of
capitalist markets in eighteenth-century Europe, most people dressed
according to their regional codes, and were limited by the types of
clothes and the cost of materials that were available in their region.
Clothing styles were also strictly regulated by class, gender or status
in the social hierarchy.
After the eighteenth century, the colonisation of most of the world
by Europe, the spread of democratic ideals and the growth of an
industrial society, completely changed the ways in which people
thought about dress and its meanings. People could use styles and
materials that were drawn from other cultures and locations, and
western dress styles for men were adopted worldwide.
In Chapter I you have seen how the French Revolution transformed
many aspects of social and political life. The revolution also swept
away existing dress codes, known as the sumptuary laws. Let us
look briefly at what these laws were.
1591 Sumptuary Laws and Social Hierarchy
In medieval Europe, dress codes were sometimes imposed upon
members of different layers of society through actual laws which
were spelt out in some detail. From about 1294 to the time of the
French Revolution in 1789, the people of France were expected to
strictly follow what were known as ‘sumptuary laws.’ The laws tried
to control the behaviour of those considered social inferiors,
preventing them from wearing certain clothes, consuming certain
foods and beverages (usually this referred to alcohol) and hunting
game in certain areas. In medieval France, the items of clothing a
person could purchase per year was regulated, not only by income
but also by social rank. The material to be used for clothing was also
legally prescribed. Only royalty could wear expensive materials like
ermine and fur, or silk, velvet and brocade. Other
classes were debarred from clothing themselves with
materials that were associated with the aristocracy.
The French Revolution ended these distinctions. As
you know from Chapter I, members of the Jacobin
clubs even called themselves the ‘sans culottes’ to
distinguish themselves from the aristocracy who
wore the fashionable ‘knee breeches’. Sans culottes
literally meant those ‘without knee breeches’. From
now on, both men and women began wearing
clothing that was loose and comfortable. The colours
of France – blue, white and red – became popular as
they were a sign of the patriotic citizen. Other
political symbols too became a part of dress: the red
cap of liberty, long trousers and the revolutionary
cockade pinned on to a hat. The simplicity of clothing
was meant to express the idea of equality.
New words
Cockade – Cap, usually worn on one side.
Ermine – Type of fur.
160
Fig.1 – An upper-class couple in eighteenth-century England.
Painting by the English artist Thomas Gainsborough (1727-
1788)Fig.3 – Woman of the middle classes, 1791.
Fig.4 – Volunteers during the French Revolution.
Fig.5 – A sans-culottes family, 1793.
Box 1 Activity
Not all sumptuary laws were meant to emphasise social hierarchy. Look at Figures 2 - 5. Write 150 words on
Some sumptuary laws were passed to protect home production what the differences in the pictures tell us
against imports. For instance, in sixteenth-century England, velvet about the society and culture in France at the
caps made with material imported from France and Italy were popular time of the Revolution.
amongst men. England passed a law which compelled all persons
over six years of age, except those of high position, to wear woollen
caps made in England, on Sundays and all holy days. This law
remained in effect for twenty-six years and was very useful in building
up the English woollen industry.
161
History
Fig.2 – An aristocratic couple on the eve of the French Revolution.
Notice the sumptuous clothing, the elaborate headgear, and the lace
edgings on the dress the lady is wearing. She also has a corset inside
the dress. This was meant to confine and shape her waist so that she
appeared narrow waisted. The nobleman, as was the custom of the
time, is wearing a long soldier’s coat, knee breeches, silk stockings and
high heeled shoes. Both of them have elaborate wigs and both have
their faces painted a delicate shade of pink, for the display of natural
skin was considered uncultured.2 Clothing and Notions of Beauty
The end of sumptuary laws did not mean that everyone in European
societies could now dress in the same way. The French Revolution
had raised the question of equality and ended aristocratic privileges,
as well as the laws that maintained those privileges. However,
differences between social strata remained. Clearly, the poor could
not dress like the rich, nor eat the same food. But laws no longer
barred people’s right to dress in the way they wished. Differences in
earning, rather than sumptuary laws, now defined what the rich and
poor could wear. And different classes developed their own culture
of dress. The notion of what was beautiful or ugly, proper or
improper, decent or vulgar, differed.
Fig.6 – Scene at an upper-class wedding by the
English painter William Hogarth (1697-1764)
Styles of clothing also emphasised differences between men and
women. Women in Victorian England were groomed from childhood
to be docile and dutiful, submissive and obedient. The ideal woman
was one who could bear pain and suffering. While men were expected
to be serious, strong, independent and aggressive, women were seen
as frivolous, delicate, passive and docile. Norms of clothing reflected
these ideals. From childhood, girls were tightly laced up and dressed
in stays. The effort was to restrict the growth of their bodies, contain
them within small moulds. When slightly older, girls had to wear
tight fitting corsets. Tightly laced, small-waisted women were
admired as attractive, elegant and graceful. Clothing thus played a
part in creating the image of frail, submissive Victorian women.
2.1 How Did Women React to These Norms?
Many women believed in the ideals of womanhood. The ideals were
in the air they breathed, the literature they read, the education they
had received at school and at home. From childhood they grew up
to believe that having a small waist was a womanly duty. Suffering
pain was essential to being a woman. To be seen as attractive, to be
womanly, they had to wear the corset. The torture and pain this
inflicted on the body was to be accepted as normal.
But not everyone accepted these values. Over the nineteenth century,
ideas changed. By the 1830s, women in England began agitating for
democratic rights. As the suffrage movement developed, many began
campaigning for dress reform. Women’s magazines described how
tight dresses and corsets caused deformities and illness among young
162
Fig.7 – A child in an aristocratic household by
the English painter William Hogarth (1697-
1764). Notice the tiny waist even at this age,
probably held in by a corset, and the sweeping
gown which would restrict her movement.
New words
Stays – Support as part of a woman’s dress
to hold the body straight
Corset – A closely fitting and stiff inner
bodice, worn by women to give shape and
support to the figure.
Suffrage – The right to vote. The suffragettes
wanted the right for women to vote.girls. Such clothing restricted body growth and hampered blood
circulation. Muscles remained underdeveloped and the spines got
bent. Doctors reported that many women were regularly complaining
of acute weakness, felt languid, and fainted frequently. Corsets then
became necessary to hold up the weakened spine.
Source A
Activity
Mary Somerville, one of the first woman mathematicians,
describes in her memoirs the experience of her childhood days:
‘Although perfectly straight and well made, I was encased in
stiff stays, with a steel busk in front, while above my frock,
bands drew my shoulder back until the shoulder blades met.
Then a steel rod with a semi-circle, which went under my chin,
was clasped to the steel busk in my stays. In this constrained
state, I and most of the younger girls had to prepare our
lessons.’
Read Sources A and B. What do they tell you
about the ideas of clothing in Victorian
society? If you were the principal in Mary
Somerville’s school how would you have
justified the clothing practices?
From Martha Somerville, ed., Personal Recollections from Early
Life to Old Age of Mary Somerville, London 1873.
Source B
Many government officials of the time were alarmed at the
health implications of the prevailing styles of dressing amongst
women. Consider the following attack on the corset:
‘It is evident physiologically that air is the pabulum of life, and
that the effect of a tight cord round the neck and of tight lacing
differ only in degrees ... for the strangulations are both fatal.
To wear tight stays in many cases is to wither, to waste, to
die.’
The Registrar General in the Ninth Annual Report of 1857.
Source C
In what ways do you think these notions of
In his novel Vanity Fair (1848), Thackeray described the charm
of a woman character, Amelia, in these words: reflected in women’s clothing?
History
Activity
Do you know how the famous English poet John Keats (1795 –
1821) described his ideal woman? He said she was ‘like a
milk-white lamb that bleats for man’s protection’.
weakness and dependence came to be
‘I think it was her weakness which was her principal charm, a
kind of sweet submission and softness, which seemed to
appeal to each man she met, for his sympathy and protection.’
New words
Busk – A strip of wood, whalebone or steel in front of the corset to stiffen and support it
Pabulum – Anything essential to maintain life and growth.
163In America, a similar movement developed amongst the white settlers
on the east coast. Traditional feminine clothes were criticised on a
variety of grounds. Long skirts, it was said, swept the grounds and
collected filth and dirt. This caused illness. The skirts were
voluminous and difficult to handle. They hampered movement and
prevented women from working and earning. Reform of the dress,
it was said, would change the position of women. If clothes were
comfortable and convenient, then women could work, earn their
living, and become independent. In the 1870s, the National Woman
Suffrage Association headed by Mrs Stanton, and the American
Woman Suffrage Association dominated by Lucy Stone both
campaigned for dress reform. The argument was: simplify dress,
shorten skirts, and abandon corsets. On both sides of the Atlantic,
there was now a movement for rational dress reform.
Box 2
The movement for Rational Dress Reform
Mrs Amelia Bloomer, an American, was the first dress reformer to
launch loose tunics worn over ankle-length trousers. The trousers
were known as ‘bloomers’, ‘rationals’, or ‘knickerbockers’. The
Rational Dress Society was started in England in 1881, but did not
achieve significant results. It was the First World War that brought
about radical changes in women’s clothing.
The reformers did not immediately succeed in changing social values.
They had to face ridicule and hostility. Conservatives everywhere
opposed change. They lamented that women who gave up traditional
norms of dressing no longer looked beautiful, and lost their femininty
and grace. Faced with persistent attacks, many women reformers
changed back into traditional clothes to conform to conventions.
By the end of the nineteenth century, however, change was clearly
in the air. Ideals of beauty and styles of clothing were both
transformed under a variety of pressures. People began accepting
the ideas of reformers they had earlier ridiculed. With new times
came new values.
164
Fig.8 – A woman in nineteenth-century
USA, before the dress reforms.
Notice the flowing gown sweeping the
ground. Reformers reacted to this type
of clothing for women.3 New Times
What were these new values? What created the pressure for change?
Many changes were made possible in Britain due to the introduction
of new materials and technologies. Other changes came about because
of the two world wars and the new working conditions for women.
Let us retrace our steps a few centuries to see what these changes
were.
3.1 New Materials
Before the seventeenth century, most ordinary women in Britain
possessed very few clothes made of flax, linen or wool, which were
difficult to clean. After 1600, trade with India brought cheap,
beautiful and easy-to-maintain Indian chintzes within the reach of
many Europeans who could now increase the size of their wardrobes.
Then, during the Industrial Revolution, in the nineteenth century,
Britain began the mass manufacture of cotton textiles which it
exported to many parts of the world, including India. Cotton clothes
became more accessible to a wider section of people in Europe. By
the early twentieth century, artificial fibres made clothes
cheaper still and easier to wash and maintain.
Fig.9 – Changes in clothing in the early
twentieth century.
Fig.9a – Even for middle- and upper-class
women, clothing styles changed. Skirts
became shorter and frills were done away with.
Fig.9b – Women working at a British
ammunition factory during the First World War.
At this time thousands of women came out to
work as war production created a demand for
increased labour.The need for easy movement
changed clothing styles.
New words
Chintz – Cotton cloth printed with designs
and flowers. From the Hindi word chint.
165
History
In the late 1870s, heavy, restrictive
underclothes, which had created such a
storm in the pages of women’s magazines,
were gradually discarded. Clothes got lighter,
shorter and simpler.Yet until 1914, clothes were ankle length, as they had been since the
thirteenth century. By 1915, however, the hemline of the skirt rose
dramatically to mid-calf.
Why this sudden change?
3.2 The War
Changes in women’s clothing came about as a result of the two World
wars.
Many European women stopped wearing jewellery and luxurious
clothes. As upper-class women mixed with other classes, social barriers
were eroded and women began to dress in similar ways.
Clothes got shorter during the First World War (1914-1918) out of
practical necessity. By 1917, over 700,000 women in Britain were
employed in ammunition factories. They wore a working uniform
of blouse and trousers with accessories such as scarves, which was
later replaced by khaki overalls and caps. Bright colours faded from
sight and only sober colours were worn as the war dragged on. Thus
clothes became plainer and simpler. Skirts became shorter. Soon
trousers became a vital part of Western women’s clothing, giving
them greater freedom of movement. Most important, women took
to cutting their hair short for convenience.
By the twentieth century, a plain and austere style came to reflect
seriousness and professionalism. New schools for children emphasised
the importance of plain dressing, and discouraged ornamentation.
Gymnastics and games entered the school curriculum for women.
As women took to sports, they had to wear clothes that did not
hamper movement. When they went out to work they needed clothes
that were comfortable and convenient.
So we see that the history of clothing is linked to the larger history
of society. We saw how clothing was defined by dominant cultural
attitudes and ideals of beauty, and how these notions changed over
time. We saw how reformers and conservatives struggled to shape
these ideals, and how changes within technology and economy, and
the pressures of new times made people feel the need for change.
1664 Transformations in Colonial India
What about India in this same period?
During the colonial period there were significant changes in male and
female clothing in India. On the one hand this was a consequence of
the influence of Western dress forms and missionary activity; on the
other it was due to the effort by Indians to fashion clothing styles that
embodied an indigenous tradition and culture. Cloth and clothing in
fact became very important symbols of the national movement. A
brief look at the nineteenth century changes will tell us a great deal
about the transformations of the twentieth century.
Fig.10 – Parsis in Bombay, 1863.
When western-style clothing came into India in the nineteenth century,
Indians reacted in three different ways:
One. Many, especially men, began incorporating some elements of
western-style clothing in their dress. The wealthy Parsis of western
India were among the first to adapt Western-style clothing. Baggy
trousers and the phenta (or hat) were added to long collarless coats,
with boots and a walking stick to complete the look of the gentleman.
To some, Western clothes were a sign of modernity and progress.
Fig.11 – Converts to
Christianity in Goa in 1907, who
have adopted Western dress.
Two. There were others who were convinced that western culture
would lead to a loss of traditional cultural identity. The use of Western-
style clothes was taken as a sign of the world turning upside down.
The cartoon of the Bengali Babu shown here,
mocks him for wearing Western-style boots
and hat and coat along with his dhoti.
Three. Some men resolved this dilemma by
wearing Western clothes without giving up
their Indian ones. Many Bengali bureaucrats
in the late nineteenth century began stocking
western-style clothes for work outside the
home and changed into more comfortable
Indian clothes at home. Early- twentieth-
century anthropologist Verrier Elwin
remembered that policemen in Poona who
were going off duty would take their
Fig.13 – Cartoon
from Indian Charivari,
1873.
Fig.12 – Cartoon, ‘The Modern Patriot’, by
Gaganendranath Tagore, early twentieth century.
A sarcastic picture of a foolish man who copies
western dress but claims to love his motherland
with all his heart. The pot-bellied man with
cigarette and Western clothes was ridiculed in
many cartoons of the time.
167
History
Western-style clothing was also especially attractive to groups of dalit
converts to Christianity who now found it liberating. Here too, it
was men rather than women who affected the new dress styles.trousers off in the street and walk home in ‘just tunic and
undergarments’. This difference between outer and inner worlds is
still observed by some men today.
Still others tried a slightly different solution to the same dilemma. They
attempted to combine Western and Indian forms of dressing.
These changes in clothing, however, had a turbulent history.
4.1 Caste Conflict and Dress Change
Though there were no formal sumptuary laws as in Europe, India
had its own strict social codes of food and dress. The caste system
clearly defined what subordinate and dominant caste Hindus should
wear, eat, etc., and these codes had the force of law. Changes in
clothing styles that threatened these norms therefore often created
violent social reactions.
In May 1822, women of the Shanar caste were attacked by Nairs in
public places in the southern princely state of Travancore, for wearing a
cloth across their upper bodies. Over subsequent decades, a violent conflict
over dress codes ensued.
The Shanars (later known as Nadars), many of whom were considered a
‘subordinate caste’ and so were generally prohibited from using umbrellas
and wearing shoes or golden ornaments. Men and women were also
expected to follow the local custom of never covering their upper bodies
before the dominant castes.
The term Nadar came to be used for all Shanars
by the time of the 1921 census.
Under the influence of Christian missionaries, Shanar women converts
began in the 1820s to wear tailored blouses and cloths to cover themselves
like the dominant castes. Hindu reformers such as Ayya Vaikunder also
participated in dress reform. Soon Nairs, one of the dominant castes of
the region, attacked these women in public places and tore off their
upper cloths. Complaints were also filed in court against this dress change,
especially since Shanars were also refusing to render free labour for the
dominant castes.
At first, the Government of Travancore issued a proclamation in
1829 ordering Shanar women ‘to abstain in future from covering the
upper parts of the body.’ But this did not prevent Shanar Christian
women, and even Shanar Hindus, from adopting the blouse and
upper cloth.
The abolition of slavery in Travancore in 1855 led to even more
frustration among the dominant castes who felt they were losing control.
In October 1859, riots broke out as Shanar women were attacked in
168
Activity
Try and find out more about reformers of the
time, such as Ayya Vaikunder, who were
engaged in dress and wider social reforms.the marketplace and stripped of their upper cloths. Houses were looted
and chapels burned. Finally, the government issued another
proclamation permitting Shanar women, whether Christian or Hindu,
to wear a jacket, or cover their upper bodies ‘in any manner whatever,
but not like the women of high caste’.
4.2 British Rule and Dress Codes
How did the British react to Indian ways of dressing? How did Indians
react to British attitudes?
In different cultures, specific items of clothing often convey contrary
meanings. This frequently leads to misunderstanding and conflict. Styles
of clothing in British India changed through such conflicts.
Consider the case of the turban and the hat. When European traders
first began frequenting India, they were distinguished from the Indian
‘turban wearers’ as the ‘hat wearers.’ These two headgears not only
looked different, they also signified different things. The turban in
India was not just for protection from the heat but was a sign of
respectability, and could not be removed at will. In the Western
tradition, the hat had to be removed before social superiors as a sign of
respect. This cultural difference created misunderstanding. The British
were often offended if Indians did not take off their turban when they
met colonial officials. Many Indians on the other hand wore the turban
to consciously assert their regional or national identity.
Fig.14 – Europeans bringing gifts to Shah
Jehan, Agra, 1633, from the Padshahnama.
Notice the European visitors’ hats at the
bottom of the picture, creating a contrast with
the turbans of the courtiers.
History
Another such conflict related to the wearing of shoes. At the beginning
of the nineteenth century, it was customary for British officials to
follow Indian etiquette and remove their footwear in the courts of
ruling kings or chiefs. Some British officials also wore Indian clothes.
But in 1830, Europeans were forbidden from wearing Indian clothes
at official functions, so that the cultural identity of the white masters
was not undermined.
Box 3
The turban on the head
The Mysore turban, called peta, was edged with gold lace, and adopted
as part of the Durbar dress of the Mysore court in the mid-nineteenth
century. By the end of the nineteenth century, a wide variety of officials,
teachers and artists in Mysore began wearing the turban, sometimes
with the Western suit, as a sign of belonging to the princely state.
Today, the Mysore turban is used largely on ceremonial occasions and
to honour visiting dignitaries.
Fig.15 – Sir M. Visveswaraya. A leading
engineer-technocrat and the Dewan of Mysore
state from 1912 to 1918. He wore a turban
with his three-piece Western style suit.
169At the same time, Indians were expected to wear Indian clothes to office
and follow Indian dress codes. In 1824 - 1828, Governor-General Amherst
insisted that Indians take their shoes off as a sign of respect when they
appeared before him, but this was not strictly followed. By the mid-
nineteenth century, when Lord Dalhousie was Governor- General, ‘shoe
respect’ was made stricter, and Indians were made to take off their shoes
when entering any government institution; only those who wore European
clothes were exempted from this rule. Many Indian government servants
were increasingly uncomfortable with these rules.
In 1862, there was a famous case of defiance of the ‘shoe respect’ rule in
a Surat courtroom. Manockjee Cowasjee Entee, an assessor in the Surat
Fouzdaree Adawlut, refused to take off his shoes in the court of the
sessions judge. The judge insisted that he take off his shoes as that was the
Indian way of showing respect to superiors. But Manockjee remained
adamant. He was barred entry into the courtroom and he sent a letter of
protest to the governor of Bombay.
The British insisted that since Indians took off their shoes when they
entered a sacred place or home, they should do so when they entered
the courtroom. In the controversy that followed, Indians urged that
taking off shoes in sacred places and at home was linked to two
different questions. One: there was the problem of dirt and filth.
Shoes collected the dirt on the road. This dirt could not be allowed
into spaces that were clean, particularly when people in Indian homes
sat on the ground. Second, leather shoes and the filth that stuck
under it were seen as polluting. But public buildings like the
courtroom were different from home.
But it took many years before shoes were permitted into
the courtroom.
170
Source D
When asked to take off his shoes at the
Surat Fouzdaree Adawlut at Surat in
1862, Manockjee told the judge that he
was willing to take off even his turban
but not his shoes. He said:
‘Taking off my pugree would have been
a greater insult to myself than to the
court, but I would have submitted to it,
because there is nothing of conscience,
or religion involved in it. I hold no respect
or disrespect, embodied or disembodied
in the shoes, but the putting on of our
turban is the greatest of all respects that
we pay. We do not have our pugrees on
when at home, but when we go out to
see respectable persons we are bound
by social etiquette to have it on whilst
we [Parsees] in our social intercourse
never ever take off our shoes before any
Parsee however great ...’
Activity
Imagine yourself to be a Muslim pleader in
the Allahabad high court in the late nineteenth
century. What kind of clothes would you wear?
Would they be very different from what you
wore at home?5 Designing the National Dress
As nationalist feelings swept across India by the late nineteenth
century, Indians began devising cultural symbols that would express
the unity of the nation. Artists looked for a national style of art.
Poets wrote national songs. Then a debate began over the design of
the national flag. The search for a national dress was part of this
move to define the cultural identity of the nation in symbolic ways.
Self-conscious experiments with dress engaged men and women of
the upper classes and castes in many parts of India. The Tagore family
of Bengal experimented, beginning in the 1870s, with designs for a
national dress for both men and women in India. Rabindranath
Tagore suggested that instead of combining Indian and European
dress, India’s national dress should combine elements of Hindu and
Muslim dress. Thus the chapkan (a long buttoned coat) was considered
the most suitable dress for men.
Fig.17 – Jnanadanandini Tagore (on the left)
with her husband Satyendranath Tagore and
other family members. She is wearing a
Brahmika sari with a blouse modelled on a
Western gown. (Courtesy: Rabindra Bhawan Photo
Archives, Visva Bharati University, Shantiniketan)
Fig.18 – Sarala daughter of RC Dutt. Note the
Parsi-bordered sari with the high collared and
sleeved velvet blouse showing how clothing
styles flowed across regions and cultures.
Fig. 16 – Lady Bachoobai
(1890), a well-known Parsi
social activist.
She is wearing a silk gara
embroidered with swans and
peonies, a common English flower.
(courtesy: Parsi Zoroastrian Project, New Delhi.)
New words
Brahmo – Those belonging to the Brahmo Samaj
171
History
There were also attempts to develop a dress style that would draw
on the tradition of different regions. In the late 1870s, Jnanadanandini
Devi, wife of Satyendranath Tagore, the first Indian member of the
ICS, returned from Bombay to Calcutta. She adopted the Parsi
style of wearing the sari pinned to the left shoulder with a brooch,
and worn with a blouse and shoes. This was quickly adopted by
Brahmo Samaji women and came to be known as the Brahmika sari.
This style gained acceptance before long among Maharashtrian and
Uttar Pradesh Brahmos, as well as non-Brahmos.However, these attempts at devising a pan-Indian style did not fully
succeed. Women of Gujarat, Kodagu, Kerala and Assam continue
to wear different types of sari.
Source E
Some people supported the attempt to change women’s clothing, others
opposed it.
‘Any civilised nation is against the kind of clothing in use in the
present time among women of our country. Indeed it is a sign of
shamelessness. Educated men have been greatly agitated about
it, almost everyone wishes for another kind of civilised clothing ...
there is a custom here of women wearing fine and transparent
clothing which reveals the whole body. Such shameless attire in no
way allows one to frequent civilised company ... such clothes can
stand in the way of our moral improvement.’
Soudamini Khastagiri, Striloker Paricchad (1872)
Source F
Fig.19 – Maharani of Travancore (1930).
Note the Western shoes and the modest long-
sleeved blouse. This style had become
common among the upper classes by the early
twentieth century.
C. Kesavan’s autobiography Jeevita Samaram recalls his
mother-in-law’s first encounter with a blouse gifted by her
sister-in-law in the late nineteenth century:
‘It looked good, but I felt ticklish wearing it. I took it off, folded
it carefully and brimming with enthusiasm, showed it to my
mother. She gave me a stern look and said “Where are you
going to gallivant in this? Fold it and keep it in the box.” ... I
was scared of my mother. She could kill me. At night I wore the
blouse and showed it to my husband. He said it looked good ...
[the next morning] I came out wearing the blouse ... I didn’t
notice my mother coming. Suddenly I heard her break a piece
from a coconut branch. When I turned round, she was behind
me fierce and furious ... she said “Take it off ... you want to
walk around in shirts like Muslim women?”’
5.1 The Swadeshi Movement
You have read about the Swadeshi movement in Bengal in the first
decade of the twentieth century. If you reflect back on the movement
you will realize that it was centrally linked to the politics of clothing.
What was this politics?
You know that the British first came to trade in Indian textiles that
were in great demand all over the world. India accounted for one-
fourth of the world’s manufactured goods in the seventeenth century.
There were a million weavers in Bengal alone in the middle of the
172
Activity
These two quotations (Sources E and F),
from about the same period are from two
different regions of India, Kerala and Bengal.
What do they tell you about the very different
notions of shame regarding women’s attire?eighteenth century. However, the Industrial Revolution in Britain,
which mechanised spinning and weaving and greatly increased the
demand for raw materials such as cotton and indigo, changed
India’s status in the world economy.
Political control of India helped the British in two ways: Indian
peasants could be forced to grow crops such as indigo, and cheap
British manufacture easily replaced coarser Indian one. Large
numbers of Indian weavers and spinners were left without work,
and important textile weaving centres such as Murshidabad,
Machilipatnam and Surat declined as demand fell.
Yet by the middle of the twentieth century, large numbers of
people began boycotting British or mill-made cloth and adopting
khadi, even though it was coarser, more expensive and difficult
to obtain. How did this change come about?
In 1905, Lord Curzon decided to partition Bengal to control the
growing opposition to British rule. The Swadeshi movement
developed in reaction to this measure. People were urged to
boycott British goods of all kinds and start their own industries
for the manufacture of goods such as matchboxes and cigarettes.
Mass protests followed, with people vowing to cleanse themselves
of colonial rule. The use of khadi was made a patriotic duty.
Women were urged to throw away their silks and glass bangles
and wear simple shell bangles. Rough homespun was glorified in
songs and poems to popularise it.
Activity
If you were a poor peasant would you have
willingly taken to giving up mill-made cloth?
The change of dress appealed largely to the upper castes
and classes rather than to those who had to make do with
less and could not afford the new products. After 15 years,
many among the upper classes also returned to wearing
European dress.
History
Though many people rallied to the cause of nationalism at
this time, it was almost impossible to compete with cheap
British goods that had flooded the market.
Despite its limitations, the experiment with Swadeshi gave
Mahatma Gandhi important ideas about using cloth as a
symbolic weapon against British rule.
5.2 Mahatma Gandhi’s Experiments with Clothing
The most familiar image of Mahatma Gandhi is of him seated,
bare chested and in a short dhoti, at the spinning wheel. He
Fig.20 – The familiar image of Mahatma Gandhi, bare
chested and at his spinning wheel.
173made spinning on the charkha and the daily use of khadi, or coarse
cloth made from homespun yarn, very powerful symbols. These
were not only symbols of self-reliance but also of resistance to the
use of British mill-made cloth.
Mahatma Gandhi’s experiments with clothing sum up the changing
attitude to dress in the Indian subcontinent. As a boy from a Gujarati
Bania family, he usually wore a shirt with a dhoti or pyjama, and
sometimes a coat. When he went to London to study law as a boy of
19 in 1888, he cut off the tuft on his head and dressed in a Western
suit so that he would not be laughed at. On his return, he continued
to wear Western suits, topped with a turban. As a lawyer
in Johannesburg, South Africa in the 1890s, he still wore
Western clothes.
Fig.21 – Mahatma
Gandhi in his
earliest known
picture, aged 7.
Soon he decided that dressing ‘unsuitably’ was a more powerful
political statement. In Durban in 1913, Gandhi first appeared in a
lungi and kurta with his head shaved as a sign of mourning to protest
against the shooting of Indian coal miners.
On his return to India in 1915, he decided to dress like a Kathiawadi
peasant. Only in 1921 did he adopt the short dhoti, the form of
dress he wore until his death. On 22 September 1921, a year after
launching the non-cooperation movement, which sought swaraj in
one year, he announced:
Fig.23 – Mahatma Gandhi (seated front right) London,
1890, at the age of 21. Note the typical Western
three-piece suit.
174
Fig.22 – Mahatma
Gandhi at age 14,
with a friend.
Fig.24 – In Johannesburg
in 1900, still in Western
dress, including tie.
Fig. 25 – In
1913 in South
Africa, dressed
for SatyagrahaFig.26 – Mahatma Gandhi with Kasturba,
shortly after his return from South Africa.
Dressed simply, he later confessed to feeling
awkward amongst the Westernised Bombay
elite. He said that he was more at home
among the labourers in South Africa.
‘I propose to discard at least up to 31st of October my topi and
vest and to content myself with a loincloth, and a chaddar whenever
necessary for protection of my body. I adopt the change because
I have always hesitated to advise anything I may not be prepared
to follow ...’
History
At this time, he did not want to use this dress all his life and only
wanted to ‘experiment for a month or two’. But soon he saw this
as his duty to the poor, and he never wore any other dress. He
consciously rejected the well-known clothes of the Indian ascetic
and adopted the dress of the poorest Indian. Khadi, white and
coarse, was to him a sign of purity, of simplicity, and of poverty.
Wearing it became also a symbol of nationalism, a rejection of
Western mill- made cloth.
He wore the short dhoti without a shirt when he went to England
for the Round Table Conference in 1931. He refused to
compromise and wore it even before King George V at
Buckingham Palace. When he was asked by journalists whether
he was wearing enough clothes to go before the King, he joked
that that ‘the King had enough on for both of us’!
1755.3 Not All could Wear Khadi
Mahatma Gandhi’s dream was to clothe the whole nation in khadi.
He felt khadi would be a means of erasing difference between religions,
classes, etc. But was it easy for others to follow in his footsteps? Was
such a unity possible? Not many could take to the single peasant
loincloth as he had. Nor did all want to. Here are some examples of
other responses to Mahatma Gandhi’s call:
· Nationalists such as Motilal Nehru, a successful barrister from
Allahabad, gave up his expensive Western-style suits and adopted the
Indian dhoti and kurta. But these were not made of coarse cloth.
· Those who had been deprived by caste norms for centuries were
attracted to Western dress styles. Therefore, unlike Mahatma Gandhi,
other nationalists such as Babasaheb Ambedkar never gave up the
Western-style suit. Many Dalits began in the early 1910s to wear three-
piece suits, and shoes and socks on all public occasions, as a political
statement of self-respect.
· A woman who wrote to Mahatma Gandhi from Maharashtra in
1928 said, ‘A year ago, I heard you speaking on the extreme necessity
of every one of us wearing khadi and thereupon decided to adopt it.
But we are poor people, My husband says khadi is costly. Belonging
as I do to Maharashtra, I wear a sari nine yards long ... (and) the elders
will not hear of a reduction (to six yards).’
· Other women, like Sarojini Naidu and Kamala Nehru, wore coloured
saris with designs, instead of coarse, white homespun.
Conclusion
Changes in styles of clothing are thus linked up with shifts in cultural
tastes and notions of beauty, with changes within the economy and
society, and with issues of social and political conflict. So when we see
clothing styles alter we need to ask: why do these changes take place?
What do they tell us about society and its history? What can they tell
us about changes in tastes and technologies, markets and industries?
176
Activity
Can you think of other reasons why the use
of khadi could not spread among some
classes, castes and regions of India?Box 4
The Gandhi cap
Some time after his return to India from South Africa in 1915, Mahatma Gandhi transformed the Kashmiri cap that he
sometimes used into a cheap white cotton khadi cap. For two years from 1919, he himself wore the cap, and then gave
it up, but by this time it had become part of the nationalist uniform and even a symbol of defiance. For example, the
Gwalior state tried to prohibit its use in 1921 during the non co-operation movement. During the Khilafat movement the
cap was worn by large numbers of Hindus and Muslims. A group of Santhals who attacked the police in 1922 in Bengal
demanding the release of Santhal prisoners believed that the Gandhi cap would protect them from bullets: three of
them died as a result.
Large numbers of nationalists defiantly wore the Gandhi cap and were even beaten or arrested for doing so. With the
rise of the Khilafat movement in the post-First World War years, the fez, a tasseled Turkish cap, became a sign of anti-
colonialism in India. Though many Hindus – as in Hyderabad for instance – also wore the fez, it soon became identified
Fig.27 –
1915.
Mahatma
Gandhi with a
turban. Fig.28 –
1915. In an
embroidered
Kashmiri cap.
Fig.29 –
1920.
Wearing the
Gandhi cap. Fig.30 –
1921. After
shaving his
head.
History
solely with Muslims.
Fig.31 – On his visit to Europe in 1931. By now his
clothes had become a powerful political statement against
Western cultural domination.
1771. Imagine you are the 14-year-old child of a trader. Write a paragraph on
what you feel about the sumptuary laws in France.
2. Can you think of any expectations of proper and improper dress which
exist today? Give examples of two forms of clothing which would be
considered disrespectful in certain places but acceptable in others.
Activities
Questions
1. Explain the reasons for the changes in clothing patterns and materials in
the eighteenth century.
2. What were the sumptuary laws in France?
3. Give any two examples of the ways in which European dress codes were
different from Indian dress codes.
4. In 1805, a British official, Benjamin Heyne, listed the manufactures of
Bangalore which included the following:
Women’s cloth of different musters and names
Coarse chintz
Muslins
Silk cloths
Of this list, which kind of cloth would have definitely fallen out of use in the
early 1900s and why?
5. Suggest reasons why women in nineteenth century India were obliged to
continue wearing traditional Indian dress even when men switched over to
the more convenient Western clothing. What does this show about the
position of women in society?
6. Winston Churchill described Mahatma Gandhi as a ‘seditious Middle Temple
Lawyer’ now ‘posing as a half naked fakir’.
What provoked such a comment and what does it tell you about the
symbolic strength of Mahatma Gandhi’s dress?
7. Why did Mahatma Gandhi’s dream of clothing the nation in khadi appeal
only to some sections of Indians?
178
?