1
How, When and Where
How Important are Dates?
There was a time when historians were
fascinated with dates. There were heated
debates about the dates on which rulers
were crowned or battles were fought.
In the common-sense notion, history was
synonymous with dates. You may have
heard people say, “I find history boring
because it is all about memorising
dates.” Is such a conception true?
History is certainly about changes
that occur over time. It is about finding
out how things were in the past and
how things have changed. As soon as
we compare the past with the present
we refer to time, we talk of “before” and
“after”.
Living in the world we do not always
ask historical questions about what we
see around us. We take things for granted,
as if what we see has always been in the
world we inhabit. But most of us have our
moments of wonder, when we are curious, and we ask
questions that actually are historical. Watching
someone sip a cup of tea at a roadside tea stall you
may wonder – when did people begin to drink tea or
coffee? Looking out of the window of a train you may
ask yourself – when were railways built and how did
people travel long distances before the age of railways?
Reading the newspaper in the morning you may be
curious to know how people got to hear about things
before newspapers began to be printed.
Activity
Look carefully at Fig.1 and write a paragraph explaining
how this image projects an imperial perception.
Fig. 1 – Brahmans offering the
Shastras to Britannia, frontispiece
to the first map produced by
James Rennel, 1782
Rennel was asked by Robert
Clive to produce maps of
Hindustan. An enthusiastic
supporter of British conquest of
India, Rennel saw preparation
of maps as essential to the
process of domination. The
picture here tries to suggest that
Indians willingly gave over their
ancient texts to Britannia – the
symbol of British power – as if
asking her to become the
protector of Indian culture.
1All such historical questions refer us back to notions
of time. But time does not have to be always precisely
dated in terms of a particular year or a month.
Sometimes it is actually incorrect to fix precise dates
to processes that happen over a period of time. People
in India did not begin drinking tea one fine day; they
developed a taste for it over time. There can be no one
clear date for a process such as this. Similarly, we
cannot fix one single date on which British rule was
established, or the national movement started, or
changes took place within the economy and society. All
these things happened over a stretch of time. We can
only refer to a span of time, an approximate period over
which particular changes became visible.
Why, then, do we continue to associate history
with a string of dates? This association has a reason.
There was a time when history was an account of
battles and big events. It was about rulers and their
policies. Historians wrote about the year a king was
crowned, the year he married, the year he had a child,
the year he fought a particular war, the year he died,
and the year the next ruler succeeded to the throne.
For events such as these, specific dates can be
determined, and in histories such as these, debates
about dates continue to be important.
As you have seen in the history textbooks of the past
two years, historians now write about a host of other
issues, and other questions. They look at how people
earned their livelihood, what they produced and ate,
how cities developed and markets came up, how
kingdoms were formed and new ideas spread, and how
cultures and society changed.
Which dates?
Fig. 2 – Advertisements help create
taste
Old advertisements help us
understand how markets for new
products were created and new
tastes were popularised. This
1922 advertisement for Lipton
tea suggests that royalty all over
the world is associated with this
tea. In the background you see
the outer wall of an Indian
palace, while in the foreground,
seated on horseback is the third
son of Queen Victoria of Britain,
Prince Arthur, who was given the
title Duke of Connaught.
2
OUR PASTS
– III
By what criteria do we choose a set of dates as
important? The dates we select, the dates around which
we compose our story of the past, are not important on
their own. They become vital because we focus on a
particular set of events as important. If our focus of
study changes, if we begin to look at new issues, a new
set of dates will appear significant.
Consider an example. In the histories written by
British historians in India, the rule of each Governor-
General was important. These histories began with the
rule of the first Governor- General, Warren Hastings,
and ended with the last Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten. In
separate chapters we read about the deeds of others –Hastings, Wellesley, Bentinck, Dalhousie, Canning,
Lawrence, Lytton, Ripon, Curzon, Harding, Irwin. It was
a seemingly never -ending succession of Governor -
Generals and Viceroys. All the dates in these history
books were linked to these personalities – to their
activities, policies, achievements. It was as if there was
nothing outside their lives that was important for us to
know. The chronology of their lives marked the different
chapters of the history of British India.
Can we not write about the history of this period in
a different way? How do we focus on the activities of
different groups and classes in Indian society within
the format of this history of Governor-Generals?
When we write history, or a story, we divide it into
chapters. Why do we do this? It is to give each chapter
some coherence. It is to tell a story in a way that makes
some sense and can be followed. In the process we focus
only on those events that help us to give shape to the
story we are telling. In the histories that revolve around
the life of British Governor-Generals, the activities of
Indians simply do not fit, they have no space. What,
then, do we do? Clearly, we need another format for
our history. This would mean that the old dates will no
longer have the significance they earlier had. A new
set of dates will become more important for us to know.
Fig. 3 – Warren Hastings became
the first Governor-General of India
in 1773
While history books narrated the
deeds of Governor-Generals,
biographies glorified them as
persons, and paintings projected
them as powerful figures.
How do we periodise?
In 1817, James Mill, a Scottish economist and political
philosopher, published a massive three-volume work,
A History of British India. In this he divided Indian
history into three periods – Hindu, Muslim and British.
This periodisation came to be widely accepted. Can
you think of any problem with this way of looking at
Indian history?
Why do we try and divide history into different
periods? We do so in an attempt to capture the
characteristics of a time, its central features as they
appear to us. So the terms through which we periodise
– that is, demarcate the difference between periods –
become important. They reflect our ideas about the past.
They show how we see the significance of the change
from one period to the next.
Mill thought that all Asian societies were at a lower
level of civilisation than Europe. According to his telling
of history, before the British came to India, Hindu and
Muslim despots ruled the country. Religious intolerance,
caste taboos and superstitious practices dominated
Activity
Interview your mother
or another member of
your family to find out
about their life. Now
divide their life into
different periods and
list out the significant
events in each period.
Explain the basis of
your periodisation.
HOW , WHEN AND WHERE
3social life. British rule, Mill felt, could civilise India. To do
this it was necessary to introduce European manners, arts,
institutions and laws in India. Mill, in fact, suggested that
the British should conquer all the territories in India to ensure
the enlightenment and happiness of the Indian people. For
India was not capable of progress without British help.
In this idea of history, British rule represented all the forces
of progress and civilisation. The period before British rule
was one of darkness. Can such a conception be accepted today?
In any case, can we refer to any period of history as “Hindu”
or “Muslim”? Did not a variety of faiths exist simultaneously
in these periods? Why should we characterise an age only
through the religion of the rulers of the time? To do so is to
suggest that the lives and practices of the others do not
really matter. We should also remember that even rulers in
ancient India did not all share the same faith.
Moving away from British classification, historians have
usually divided Indian history into ‘ancient’, ‘medieval’ and
‘modern’. This division too has its problems. It is a
periodisation that is borrowed from the West where the
modern period was associated with the growth of all the
forces of modernity – science, reason, democracy, liberty and
equality. Medieval was a term used to describe a society
where these features of modern society did not exist. Can we
uncritically accept this characterisation of the modern period
to describe the period of our study? As you will see in this
book, under British rule people did not have equality, freedom
or liberty. Nor was the period one of economic growth
and progress.
Many historians therefore refer to this period as ‘colonial’.
What is colonial?
In this book you will read about the way the British came to
conquer the country and establish their rule, subjugating
local nawabs and rajas. You will see how they established
control over the economy and society, collected revenue to
meet all their expenses, bought the goods they wanted at
low prices, produced crops they needed for export, and
you will understand the changes that came about as a
consequence. You will also come to know about the changes
British rule brought about in values and tastes, customs
and practices. When the subjugation of one country by another
leads to these kinds of political, economic, social and cultural
changes, we refer to the process as colonisation.
You will, however, find that all classes and groups did not
experience these changes in the same way. That is why the
book is called Our Pasts in the plural.
4
OUR PASTS
– IIISource 1
How do We Know?
What sources do historians use in writing about the
last 250 years of Indian history?
Reports to the
Home Department
Administration produces records
One important source is the official records of the British
administration. The British believed that the act of
writing was important. Every instruction, plan, policy
decision, agreement, investigation had to be clearly
written up. Once this was done, things could be properly
studied and debated. This conviction produced an
administrative culture of memos, notings and reports.
The British also felt that all important documents
and letters needed to be carefully preserved. So they
set up record rooms attached to all administrative
institutions. The village tahsildar’s office, the
collectorate, the commissioner’s office, the provincial
secretariats, the lawcourts – all had their record rooms.
Specialised institutions like archives and museums were
also established to preserve important records.
Letters and memos that moved from one branch
of the administration to another in the early years
of the nineteenth century can still be read in the
archives. You can also study the notes and reports that
district officials prepared, or the instructions and
directives that were sent by officials at the top to
provincial administrators.
In the early years of the nineteenth century these
documents were carefully copied out and beautifully
written by calligraphists – that is, by those who
specialised in the art of beautiful writing. By the middle
of the nineteenth century, with the spread of printing,
multiple copies of these records were printed as
proceedings of each government department.
In 1946 the colonial
government in India
was trying to put down a
mutiny that broke out
on the ships of the
Royal Indian Navy. Here
is a sample of the kind
of reports the Home
Department got from
the different dockyards:
Bombay: Arrangements
have been made for
the Army to take over
ships and establishment.
Royal Navy ships are
remaining outside the
harbour.
Karachi: 301 mutineers
are under arrest and
a few more strongly
suspected are to
be arrested ... All
establishments ... are
under military guard.
Vizagapatnam: The
position is completely
under control and no
violence has occurred.
Military guards have
been placed on ships
and establishments.
No further trouble is
expected except that
a few men may refuse
to work.
Director of Intelligence, HQ.
India Command, Situation
Report No. 7. File No. 5/21/46
Home (Political),
Government of India
Fig. 4 – The National Archives of India came up in the 1920s
When New Delhi was built, the National Museum and the National
Archives were both located close to the Viceregal Palace. This location
reflects the importance these institutions had in British imagination.
HOW , WHEN AND WHERE
5Surveys become important
Fig. 5 – A
custard-apple
plant, 1770s
Botanical gardens
and natural history
museums established by the
British collected plant specimens
and information about their
uses. Local artists were asked to
draw pictures of these specimens.
Historians are now looking at
the way such information
was gathered and what this
information reveals about the
nature of colonialism.
The practice of surveying also became common under
the colonial administration. The British believed that
a country had to be properly known before it could be
effectively administered.
By the early nineteenth century detailed surveys
were being carried out to map the entire country.
In the villages, revenue surveys were conducted.
The effort was to know the topography, the soil
quality, the flora, the fauna, the local histories,
and the cropping pattern – all the facts seen as
necessary to know about to administer the region.
From the end of the nineteenth century, Census
operations were held every ten years. These prepared
detailed records of the number of people in all the
provinces of India, noting information on castes,
religions and occupation. There were many other surveys
– botanical surveys, zoological surveys, archaeological
surveys, anthropological surveys, forest surveys.
What official records do not tell
From this vast corpus of records we can get to know a
lot, but we must remember that these are official
records. They tell us what the officials thought, what
Fig. 6 – Mapping and survey operations in progress in Bengal, a drawing by James Prinsep, 1832
Note how all the instruments that were used in surveys are placed in the foreground to
emphasise the scientific nature of the project.
6
OUR PASTS
– IIISource 2
“Not fit for human
consumption”
Newspapers
provide
accounts of the movements
in different parts of the
country. Here is a report
of a police strike in 1946.
Fig. 7 – The rebels of 1857
Images need to be carefully studied for they project the viewpoint
of those who create them. This image can be found in several
illustrated books produced by the British after the 1857 rebellion.
The caption at the bottom says: “Mutinous sepoys share the loot”.
In British representations the rebels appear as greedy, vicious and
brutal. You will read about the rebellion in Chapter 5.
they were interested in, and what they wished to
preserve for posterity. These records do not always help
us understand what other people in the country felt,
and what lay behind their actions.
For that we need to look elsewhere. When we begin
to search for these other sources we find them in plenty,
though they are more difficult to get than official records.
We have diaries of people, accounts of pilgrims and
travellers, autobiographies of important personalities,
and popular booklets that were sold in the local bazaars.
As printing spread, newspapers were published and
issues were debated in public. Leaders and reformers
wrote to spread their ideas, poets and novelists wrote
to express their feelings.
All these sources, however, were produced by those
who were literate. From these we will not be able to
understand how history was experienced and lived by
the tribals and the peasants, the workers in the mines
or the poor on the streets. Getting to know their lives is
a more difficult task.
Yet this can be done, if we make a little bit of effort.
When you read this book you will see how this can
be done.
More than 2000
policemen in Delhi
refused to take their
food on Thursday
morning as a protest
against their low
salaries and the
bad quality of food
supplied to them
from the Police Lines
kitchen.
As the news spread
to the other police
stations, the men there
also refused to take
food ... One of the
strikers said: “The
food supplied to us
from the Police Lines
kitchen is not fit for
human consumption.
Even cattle would
not eat the chappattis
and dal which we
have to eat.”
Hindustan Times,
22 March, 1946
Activity
Look at Sources 1 and 2.
Do you find any
differences in the nature
of reporting? Explain
what you observe.
HOW , WHEN AND WHERE
7Let’s imagine
Imagine that you are
a historian wanting
to find out about
how agriculture
changed in a remote
tribal area after
independence. List
the different ways in
which you would find
information on this.
Let’s recall
1. State whether true or false:
(a) James Mill divided Indian history into three
periods – Hindu, Muslim, Christian.
(b) Official documents help us understand what
the people of the country think.
(c) The British thought surveys were important
for effective administration.
Let’s discuss
2. What is the problem with the periodisation of Indian
history that James Mill offers?
3. Why did the British preserve official documents?
4. How will the information historians get from old
newspapers be different from that found in police
reports?
Let’s do
5. Can you think of examples of surveys in your world
today? Think about how toy companies get
information about what young people enjoy playing
with or how the government finds out about the
number of young people in school. What can a
historian derive from such surveys?
8
OUR PASTS
– III
2
From Trade to Territory
The Company Establishes Power
Aurangzeb was the last of the powerful Mughal rulers.
He established control over a very large part of the
territory that is now known as India. After his death in
1707, many Mughal governors (subadars) and big
zamindars began asserting their authority and
establishing regional kingdoms. As powerful regional
kingdoms emerged in various parts of India, Delhi could
no longer function as an effective centre.
By the second half of the eighteenth century, however,
a new power was emerging on the political horizon –
the British. Did you know that the British originally
came as a small trading company and were reluctant to
acquire territories? How then did they come to be masters
of a vast empire? In this chapter you will see how this
came about.
Fig. 1 – Bahadur Shah Zafar
and his sons being arrested by
Captain Hodson
After Aurangzeb there was no
powerful Mughal ruler, but
Mughal emperors continued to
be symbolically important.
In fact, when a massive rebellion
against British rule broke out in
1857, Bahadur Shah Zafar,
the Mughal emperor at the time,
was seen as the natural leader.
Once the revolt was put down by
the company, Bahadur Shah
Zafar was forced to leave the
kingdom, and his sons were shot
in cold blood.
9East India Company
Comes East
Fig. 2 – Routes to India in the
eighteenth century
Mercantile – A business
enterprise that makes
profit primarily through
trade, buying goods
cheap and selling them
at higher prices
10
OUR PASTS
– III
In 1600, the East India
Company acquired a charter
from the ruler of England,
Queen Elizabeth I, granting it
the sole right to trade with the
East. This meant that no other
trading group in England could
compete with the East India
Company. With this charter
the Company could venture
across the oceans, looking
for new lands from which it
could buy goods at a cheap price, and carry them
back to Europe to sell at higher prices. The Company
did not have to fear competition from other English
trading companies. Mercantile trading companies
in those days made profit primarily by excluding
competition, so that they could buy cheap and sell dear.
The royal charter, however, could not prevent other
European powers from entering the Eastern markets.
By the time the first English ships sailed down the
west coast of Africa, round the Cape of Good Hope, and
crossed the Indian Ocean, the Portuguese had already
established their presence in the western coast of
India, and had their base in Goa. In fact, it was Vasco
da Gama, a Portuguese explorer, who had discovered
this sea route to India in 1498. By the early seventeenth
century, the Dutch too were exploring the possibilities
of trade in the Indian Ocean. Soon the French traders
arrived on the scene.
The problem was that all the companies were
interested in buying the same things. The fine qualities
of cotton and silk produced in India had a big market
in Europe. Pepper, cloves, cardamom and cinnamon too
were in great demand. Competition amongst the
European companies inevitably pushed up the prices
at which these goods could be purchased, and this
reduced the profits that could be earned. The only way
the trading companies could flourish was by eliminating
rival competitors. The urge to secure markets therefore
led to fierce battles between the trading companies.
Through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries they
regularly sank each other’s ships, blockaded routes,
and prevented rival ships from moving with supplies ofgoods. Trade was carried on with arms and trading
posts were protected through fortification.
This effort to fortify settlements and carry on profitable
trade also led to intense conflict with local rulers. The
company therefore found it difficult to separate trade
from politics. Let us see how this happened.
East India Company begins trade in Bengal
The first English factory was set up on the banks of
the river Hugli in 1651. This was the base from which
the Company’s traders, known at that time as “factors”,
operated. The factory had a warehouse where goods
for export were stored, and it had offices where Company
officials sat. As trade expanded, the Company persuaded
merchants and traders to come and settle near the
factory. By 1696 it began building a fort around the
settlement. Two years later it bribed Mughal officials
into giving the Company zamindari rights over three
villages. One of these was Kalikata, which later grew
into the city of Calcutta or Kolkata as it is known today.
It also persuaded the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb to
issue a farman granting the Company the right to trade
duty free.
The Company tried continuously to press for more
concessions and manipulate existing privileges.
Aurangzeb’s farman, for instance, had granted only
the Company the right to trade duty free. But officials
of the Company, who were carrying on private trade on
the side, were expected to pay duty. This they refused
to pay, causing an enormous loss of revenue for Bengal.
How could the Nawab of Bengal, Murshid Quli Khan,
not protest?
Farman – A royal edict,
a royal order
Fig. 3 – Local boats bring goods
from ships in Madras, painted by
William Simpson, 1867
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
11How trade led to battles
Fig. 4 – Robert Clive
Puppet – Literally, a toy
that you can move with
strings. The term is used
disapprovingly to refer to
a person who is controlled
by someone else.
Did you know?
Did you know how Plassey
got its name? Plassey is an
anglicised pronunciation
of Palashi and the place
derived its name from the
palash tree known for its
beautiful red flowers that
yield gulal, the powder
used in the festival of Holi.
12
OUR PASTS
– III
Through the early eighteenth century the conflict between
the Company and the nawabs of Bengal intensified.
After the death of Aurangzeb, the Bengal nawabs asserted
their power and autonomy, as other regional powers were
doing at that time. Murshid Quli Khan was followed by
Alivardi Khan and then Sirajuddaulah as the Nawab of
Bengal. Each one of them was a strong ruler. They refused
to grant the Company concessions, demanded large
tributes for the Company’s right to trade, denied it any
right to mint coins, and stopped it from extending its
fortifications. Accusing the Company of deceit, they
claimed that the Company was depriving the Bengal
government of huge amounts of revenue and
undermining the authority of the nawab. It was refusing
to pay taxes, writing disrespectful letters, and trying to
humiliate the nawab and his officials.
The Company on its part declared that the unjust
demands of the local officials were ruining the trade of
the Company, and trade could flourish only if the duties
were removed. It was also convinced that to expand
trade it had to enlarge its settlements, buy up villages,
and rebuild its forts.
The conflicts led to confrontations and finally
culminated in the famous Battle of Plassey.
The Battle of Plassey
When Alivardi Khan died in 1756, Sirajuddaulah became
the nawab of Bengal. The Company was worried about
his power and keen on a puppet ruler who would
willingly give trade concessions and other privileges.
So it tried, though without success, to help one of
Sirajuddaulah’s rivals become the nawab. An infuriated
Sirajuddaulah asked the Company to stop meddling in
the political affairs of his dominion, stop fortification,
and pay the revenues. After negotiations failed, the
Nawab marched with 30,000 soldiers to the English
factory at Kassimbazar, captured the Company officials,
locked the warehouse, disarmed all Englishmen, and
blockaded English ships. Then he marched to Calcutta
to establish control over the Company’s fort there.
On hearing the news of the fall of Calcutta, Company
officials in Madras sent forces under the command of
Robert Clive, reinforced by naval fleets. Prolonged
negotiations with the Nawab followed. Finally, in 1757,
Robert Clive led the Company’s army against
Sirajuddaulah at Plassey. One of the main reasons forFig. 5 – The General
Court Room, East
India House,
Leadenhall Street
The Court of
Proprietors of the
East India Company
had their meetings
in the East India
House on Leadenhall
Street in London.
This is a picture of
one of their meetings
in progress.
the defeat of the Nawab was that the forces led by Mir Jafar, one of
Sirajuddaulah’s commanders, never fought the battle. Clive had
managed to secure his support by promising to make him nawab
after crushing Sirajuddaulah.
The Battle of Plassey became famous because it was the first
major victory the Company won in India.
Source 1
The promise of riches
The territorial ambitions of the mercantile East India
Company were viewed with distrust and doubt in England.
After the Battle of Plassey, Robert Clive wrote to William
Pitt, one of the Principal Secretaries of State to the English
monarch, on 7 January 1759 from Calcutta:
But so large a sovereignty may possibly be an object
too extensive for a mercantile Company ... I flatter
myself ... that there will be little or no difficulty in
obtaining the absolute possession of these rich
kingdoms: ... Now I leave you to judge, whether an
income yearly of two million sterling with the
possession of three provinces ... be an object deserving
the public attention ...
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
13Source 2
The Nawab
complains
In 1733 the Nawab of
Bengal said this about the
English traders:
When they first came
into the country they
petitioned the then
government in a
humble manner for
liberty to purchase a
spot of ground to
build a factory house
upon, which was no
sooner granted but
they built a strong
fort, surrounded it
with a ditch which has
communication with
the river and mounted
a great number of
guns upon the walls.
They have enticed
several merchants
and others to go and
take protection under
them and they collect
a revenue which
amounts to Rs 100, 000
... they rob and
plunder and carry
great number of the
king’s subjects of both
sexes into slavery into
their own country ...
After the defeat at Plassey, Sirajuddaulah was
assassinated and Mir Jafar made the nawab. The
Company was still unwilling to take over the
responsibility of administration. Its prime objective was
the expansion of trade. If this could be done without
conquest, through the help of local rulers who were
willing to grant privileges, then territories need not be
taken over directly.
Soon the Company discovered that this was rather
difficult. For even the puppet nawabs were not always
as helpful as the Company wanted them to be. After all,
they had to maintain a basic appearance of dignity and
sovereignty if they wanted respect from their subjects.
What could the Company do? When Mir Jafar
protested, the Company deposed him and installed Mir
Qasim in his place. When Mir Qasim complained, he in
turn was defeated in a battle fought at Buxar (1764),
driven out of Bengal, and Mir Jafar was reinstalled. The
Nawab had to pay Rs 500,000 every month but the
Company wanted more money to finance its wars, and
meet the demands of trade and its other expenses. It
wanted more territories and more revenue. By the time
Mir Jafar died in 1765 the mood of the Company had
changed. Having failed to work with puppet nawabs, Clive
declared: “We must indeed become nawabs ourselves.”
Finally, in 1765 the Mughal emperor appointed the
Company as the Diwan of the provinces of Bengal. The
Diwani allowed the Company to use the vast revenue
resources of Bengal. This solved a major problem that
the Company had earlier faced. From the early eighteenth
century its trade with India had expanded. But it had
to buy most of the goods in India with gold and silver
imported from Britain. This was because at this time
Britain had no goods to sell in India. The outflow of
gold from Britain slowed after the Battle of Plassey,
and entirely stopped after the assumption of Diwani.
Now revenues from India could finance Company
expenses. These revenues could be used to purchase
cotton and silk textiles in India, maintain Company
troops, and meet the cost of building the Company fort
and offices at Calcutta.
Company officials become “nabobs”
What did it mean to be nawabs? It meant of course that
the Company acquired more power and authority. But
it also meant something else. Each company servant
began to have visions of living like nawabs.
14
OUR PASTS
– IIIAfter the Battle of Plassey the actual nawabs of
Bengal were forced to give land and vast sums of money
as personal gifts to Company officials. Robert Clive
himself amassed a fortune in India. He had come to
Madras (now Chennai) from England in 1743 at the
age of 18. When in 1767 he left India his Indian fortune
was worth £401,102. Interestingly, when he was
appointed Governor of Bengal in 1764, he was asked to
remove corruption in Company administration but he
was himself cross-examined in 1772 by the British
Parliament which was suspicious of his vast wealth.
Although he was acquitted, he committed suicide
in 1774.
However, not all Company officials succeeded in
making money like Clive. Many died an early death
in India due to disease and war and it would not be
right to regard all of them as corrupt and dishonest.
Many of them came from humble backgrounds and
their uppermost desire was to earn enough in India,
return to Britain and lead a comfortable life. Those
who managed to return with wealth led flashy lives
and flaunted their riches. They were called “nabobs”
– an anglicised version of the Indian word nawab.
They were often seen as upstarts and social climbers
in British society and were ridiculed or made fun of
in plays and cartoons.
Company Rule Expands
If we analyse the process of annexation of Indian states
by the East India Company from 1757 to 1857, certain
key aspects emerge. The Company rarely launched a
direct military attack on an unknown territory. Instead
it used a variety of political, economic and diplomatic
methods to extend its influence before annexing an
Indian kingdom.
After the Battle of Buxar (1764), the Company
appointed Residents in Indian states. They were political
or commercial agents and their job was to serve and
further the interests of the Company. Through the
Residents, the Company officials began interfering in
the internal affairs of Indian states. They tried to decide
who was to be the successor to the throne, and who
was to be appointed in administrative posts. Sometimes
the Company forced the states into a “subsidiary
alliance”. According to the terms of this alliance, Indian
rulers were not allowed to have their independent armed
forces. They were to be protected by the Company, but
Source 3
How did Clive
see himself?
At his hearing in front of
a Committee in Parliament,
Clive declared that he had
shown admirable restraint
after the Battle of Plassey.
This is what he said:
Consider the situation
in which the victory at
Plassey had placed
me! A great prince was
dependent on my
pleasure; an opulent
city lay at my mercy;
its richest bankers bid
against each other
for my smiles; I
walked through vaults
which were thrown
open to me alone,
piled on either hand
with gold and jewels!
Mr Chairman, at
this moment I stand
astonished at my
moderation.
Activity
Imagine that you are a
young Company official
who has been in India
for a few months.
Write a letter home to
your mother telling her
about your luxurious
life and contrasting it
with your earlier life in
Britain.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
15had to pay for the “subsidiary forces” that the Company
was supposed to maintain for the purpose of this
protection. If the Indian rulers failed to make the payment,
then part of their territory was taken away as penalty.
For example, when Richard Wellesley was Governor -
General (1798-1805), the Nawab of Awadh was forced
to give over half of his territory to the Company in 1801,
as he failed to pay for the “subsidiary forces”. Hyderabad
was also forced to cede territories on similar grounds.
Source 4
What power did the Resident have?
Fig. 6 – Nawab Shujauddaulah
of Awadh, with his sons and the
British Resident, painted by Tilly
Kettle (oil, 1772)
The treaties that followed the
Battle of Buxar forced Nawab
Shujauddaulah to give up much
of his authority. Here, however,
he poses in regal splendour,
towering over the Resident.
Injunction – Instruction
Subservience –
Submissiveness
This is what James Mill, the famous economist and
political philosopher from Scotland, wrote about the
residents appointed by the Company.
We place a resident, who really is king of the
country, whatever injunctions of non-interference
he may act under. As long as the prince acts in
perfect subservience, and does what is agreeable
to the residents, that is, to the British Government,
things go on quietly; they are managed without
the resident appearing much in the administration
of affairs ... but when anything of a different
nature happens, the moment the prince takes a
course which the British Government think wrong,
then comes clashing and disturbance.
James Mill (1832)
Tipu Sultan – The “Tiger of Mysore”
Fig. 7 – Tipu Sultan
16
OUR PASTS
– III
The Company resorted to direct military confrontation
when it saw a threat to its political or economic interests.
This can be illustrated with the case of the southern
Indian state of Mysore.
Mysore had grown in strength under the leadership
of powerful rulers like Haidar Ali (ruled from 1761 to
1782) and his famous son Tipu Sultan (ruled from 1782
to 1799). Mysore controlled the profitable trade of the
Malabar coast where the Company purchased pepper
and cardamom. In 1785 Tipu Sultan stopped the export
of sandalwood, pepper and cardamom through the ports
of his kingdom, and disallowed local merchants from
trading with the Company. He also established a closeFig. 8 – Cornwallis receiving the
sons of Tipu Sultan as hostages,
painted by Daniel Orme, 1793
The Company forces were
defeated by Haidar Ali and Tipu
Sultan in several battles. But in
1792, attacked by the combined
forces of the Marathas, the
Nizam of Hyderabad and the
Company, Tipu was forced to
sign a treaty with the British
by which two of his sons were
taken away as hostages. British
painters always liked painting
scenes that showed the triumph
of British power.
relationship with the French in India, and modernised
his army with their help.
The British were furious. They saw Haidar and Tipu
as ambitious, arrogant and dangerous – rulers who had
to be controlled and crushed. Four wars were fought
with Mysore (1767- 69, 1780-84, 1790-92 and 1799).
Only in the last – the Battle of Seringapatam – did the
Company ultimately win a victory. Tipu Sultan was
killed defending his capital Seringapatam, Mysore was
placed under the former ruling dynasty of the Wodeyars
and a subsidiary alliance was imposed on the state.
Fig. 9 – T ipu’s toy tiger
This is the picture of a big mechanical toy that Tipu possessed.
You can see a tiger mauling a European soldier. When its handle
was turned the toy tiger roared and the soldier shrieked. This toy-
tiger is now kept in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
The British took it away when Tipu Sultan died defending his
capital Seringapatam on 4 May 1799.
The legend of Tipu
Kings are often surrounded
by legend and their powers
glorified through folklore.
Here is a legend about Tipu
Sultan who became the
ruler of Mysore in 1782. It
is said that once he went
hunting in the forest with a
French friend. There he
came face to face with a
tiger. His gun did not work
and his dagger fell to the
ground. He battled with the
tiger unarmed until he
managed to reach down
and pick up the dagger.
Finally he was able to kill
the tiger in the battle. After
this he came to be known
as the “Tiger of Mysore”. He
had the image of the tiger
on his flag.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
17. Activity War with the Marathas
Imagine that you have
come across two old
newspapers reporting
on the Battle of
Seringapatam and the
death of Tipu Sultan.
One is a British paper
and the other is from
Mysore. Write the
headline for each of
the two newspapers. From the late eighteenth century the Company also
sought to curb and eventually destroy Maratha power.
With their defeat in the Third Battle of Panipat in 1761,
the Marathas’ dream of ruling from Delhi was shattered.
They were divided into many states under different
chiefs (sardars) belonging to dynasties such as Sindhia,
Holkar, Gaikwad and Bhonsle. These chiefs were held
together in a confederacy under a Peshwa (Principal
Minister) who became its effective military and
administrative head based in Pune. Mahadji Sindhia
and Nana Phadnis were two famous Maratha soldiers
and statesmen of the late eighteenth century.
The Marathas were subdued in a series of wars. In
the first war that ended in 1782 with the Treaty of
Salbai, there was no clear victor. The Second Anglo-
Maratha War (1803-05) was fought on different fronts,
resulting in the British gaining Orissa and the
territories north of the Yamuna river including Agra
and Delhi. Finally, the Third Anglo-Maratha War of
1817-19 crushed Maratha power. The Peshwa was
removed and sent away to Bithur near Kanpur with a
pension. The Company now had complete control over
the territories south of the Vindhyas.
Confederacy – Alliance
The claim to paramountcy
Fig. 10 – Lord Hastings
18
OUR PASTS
– III
It is clear from the above that from the early nineteenth
century the Company pursued an aggressive policy of
territorial expansion. Under Lord Hastings (Governor-
General from 1813 to 1823) a new policy of “paramountcy”
was initiated. Now the Company claimed that its authority
was paramount or supreme, hence its power was greater
than that of Indian states. In order to protect its interests
it was justified in annexing or threatening to annex
any Indian kingdom. This view continued to guide later
British policies as well.
This process, however, did not go unchallenged. For
example, when the British tried to annex the small state
of Kitoor (in Karnataka today), Rani Channamma took
to arms and led an anti-British resistance movement.
She was arrested in 1824 and died in prison in 1829.
But Rayanna, a poor chowkidar of Sangoli in Kitoor,
carried on the resistance. With popular support he
destroyed many British camps and records. He was
caught and hanged by the British in 1830. You will
read more about several cases of resistance later in
the book.In the late 1830s the East India
Company became worried about Russia.
It imagined that Russia might expand
across Asia and enter India from the
north-west. Driven by this fear, the
British now wanted to secure their
control over the north-west. They fought
a prolonged war with Afghanistan
between 1838 and 1842 and established
indirect Company rule there. Sind was
taken over in 1843. Next in line was
Punjab. But the presence of Maharaja
Ranjit Singh held back the Company.
After his death in 1839, two prolonged
wars were fought with the Sikh
kingdom. Ultimately, in 1849, Punjab
was annexed.
The Doctrine of Lapse
The final wave of annexations occurred
under Lord Dalhousie who was the
Governor-General from 1848 to 1856. He
devised a policy that came to be known
as the Doctrine of Lapse. The doctrine
declared that if an Indian ruler died
without a male heir his kingdom would
“lapse”, that is, become part of Company
territory. One kingdom after another
was annexed simply by applying this
doctrine: Satara (1848), Sambalpur
(1850), Udaipur (1852), Nagpur (1853)
and Jhansi (1854).
Finally, in 1856, the Company also took over Awadh.
This time the British had an added argument – they
said they were “obliged by duty” to take over Awadh in
order to free the people from the “misgovernment” of
the Nawab! Enraged by the humiliating way in which
the Nawab was deposed, the people of Awadh joined
the great revolt that broke out in 1857.
Fig. 11 – Maharaja Ranjit Singh
holding court
Activity
Imagine that you are a nawab’s nephew and have
been brought up thinking that you will one day be
king. Now you find that this will not be allowed by
the British because of the new Doctrine of Lapse.
What will be your feelings? What will you plan to do
so that you can inherit the crown?
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
19Fig. 11 a – India, 1797
Fig. 11 b – India, 1840
Fig. 11 a, b, c – Expansion of British
territorial power in India
Look at these maps along with a present-
day political map of India. In each of these
maps, try and identify the different parts of
India that were not under British rule.
Fig. 11 c – India, 1857
20
OUR PASTS
– IIISetting up a New Administration
Warren Hastings (Governor-General from 1773 to 1785)
was one of the many important figures who played a
significant role in the expansion of Company power. By
his time the Company had acquired power not only
in Bengal, but also in Bombay and Madras. British
territories were broadly divided into administrative
units called Presidencies. There were three Presidencies:
Bengal, Madras and Bombay. Each was ruled by a
Governor. The supreme head of the administration
was the Governor-General. Warren Hastings, the first
Governor-General, introduced several administrative
reforms, notably in the sphere of justice.
From 1772 a new system of justice was established.
Each district was to have two courts – a criminal court
( faujdari adalat ) and a civil court (diwani adalat ).
Maulvis and Hindu pandits interpreted Indian laws for
the European district collectors who presided over civil
courts. The criminal courts were still under a qazi and
a mufti but under the supervision of the collectors.
Qazi – A judge
Mufti – A jurist of the
Muslim community
responsible for
expounding the law
that the qazi would
administer
Impeachment – A trial
by the House of Lords
in England for charges
of misconduct brought
against a person in the
House of Commons
Fig. 12 – The trial of Warren Hastings, painted by R.G. Pollard, 1789
When Warren Hastings went back to England in 1785, Edmund Burke accused him
of being personally responsible for the misgovernment of Bengal. This led to an
impeachment proceeding in the British Parliament that lasted seven years.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
21Source 5
“I impeach the
common enemy and
oppressor of all.”
Here is a passage from
Edmund Burke’s eloquent
opening speech during
the impeachment of
Warren Hastings:
I impeach him in the
name of the people of
India, whose rights he
has trodden under
his foot and whose
country he has turned
into a desert. Lastly in
the name of human
nature itself, in the
name of both the
sexes, in the name of
every age, in the
name of every rank, I
impeach the common
enemy and oppressor
of all.
Dharmashastras –
Sanskrit texts
prescribing social rules
and codes of behaviour,
composed from c. 500 BCE
onwards
Sawar – Men on horses
Musket – A heavy gun
used by infantry soldiers
Matchlock – An early
type of gun in which the
powder was ignited by a
match
22
OUR PASTS
– III
A major problem was that the Brahman pandits
gave different interpretations of local laws based on
different schools of the dharmashastra. To bring about
uniformity, in 1775 eleven pandits were asked to compile
a digest of Hindu laws. N.B. Halhed translated this
digest into English. By 1778 a code of Muslim laws was
also compiled for the benefit of European judges. Under
the Regulating Act of 1773, a new Supreme Court was
established, while a court of appeal – the Sadar Nizamat
Adalat – was also set up at Calcutta.
The principal figure in an Indian district was the
Collector. As the title suggests, his main job was to
collect revenue and taxes and maintain law and order
in his district with the help of judges, police officers
and darogas. His office – the Collectorate – became the
new centre of power and patronage that steadily
replaced previous holders of authority.
The Company army
Colonial rule in India brought in some new ideas of
administration and reform but its power rested on its
military strength. The Mughal army was mainly
composed of cavalry (sawars: trained soldiers on
horseback) and infantry, that is, paidal (foot) soldiers.
They were given training in archery (teer-andazi) and
the use of the sword. The cavalry dominated the army
and the Mughal state did not feel the need to have a large
professionally trained infantry. The rural areas had a
large number of armed peasants and the local zamindars
often supplied the Mughals with paidal soldiers.
A change occurred in the eighteenth century when
Mughal successor states like Awadh and Benaras started
recruiting peasants into their armies and training them
as professional soldiers. The East India Company adopted
the same method when it began recruitment for its own
army, which came to be known as the sepoy army (from
the Indian word sipahi, meaning soldier).
As warfare technology changed from the 1820s, the
cavalry requirements of the Company’s army declined.
This is because the British empire was fighting in
Burma, Afghanistan and Egypt where soldiers were
armed with muskets and matchlocks. The soldiers of
the Company’s army had to keep pace with changing
military requirements and its infantry regiments now
became more important.
In the early nineteenth century the British began
to develop a uniform military culture. Soldiers wereFig. 13 – A sawar of Bengal in
the service of the Company,
painted by an unknown Indian
artist, 1780
After the battles with the
Marathas and the Mysore rulers,
the Company realised the
importance of strengthening its
cavalry force.
increasingly subjected to European-style training, drill
and discipline that regulated their life far more than
before. Often this created problems since caste and
community feelings were ignored in building a force of
professional soldiers. Could individuals so easily
give up their caste and religious feelings? Could they
see themselves only as soldiers and not as members
of communities?
What did the sepoys feel? How did they react to the
changes in their lives and their identity – that is, their
sense of who they were? The Revolt of 1857 gives us a
glimpse into the world of the sepoys. You will read about
this revolt in Chapter 5.
Conclusion
Thus the East India Company was transformed from a
trading company to a territorial colonial power. The
arrival of new steam technology in the early nineteenth
century also aided this process. Till then it would take
anywhere between six and eight months to travel to
India by sea. Steamships reduced the journey time to
three weeks enabling more Britishers and their families
to come to a far- off country like India.
By 1857 the Company came to exercise direct rule
over about 63 per cent of the territory and 78 per cent
of the population of the Indian subcontinent. Combined
with its indirect influence on the remaining territory
and population of the country, the East India Company
had virtually the whole of India under its control.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
23ELSEWHERE
Slave Trade in South Africa
The Dutch trading ships reached southern
Africa in the seventeenth century. Soon a
slave trade began. People were captured,
chained, and sold in slave markets. When
slavery ended in 1834 there were 36,774
privately owned slaves at the Cape –
located at the southern most tip of Africa.
A visitor to the Cape in 1824 has left
a moving account of what he saw at a
slave auction:
Having learned that there was to be
sale of cattle, farm-stock, etc by auction, ... we halted our wagon for the purpose of
procuring fresh oxen. Among the stock ... was a female slave and her three children.
The farmers examined them, as if they had been so many head of cattle. They were
sold separately, and to different purchasers. The tears, the anxiety, the anguish of the
mother, while she ... cast heart-rending look upon her children, and the simplicity and
touching sorrow of the poor young ones while they clung to their distracted parent ...
contrasted with the marked insensitivity and jocular countenances of the spectators
Quoted in Nigel Wordon et. al., The Chains that Bind us: a History of Slavery at the Cape, 1996.
Let’s imagine
You are living in
England in the late
eighteenth or early
nineteenth century.
How would you have
reacted to the stories
of British conquests?
Remember that you
would have read
about the immense
fortunes that many
of the officials were
making.
Let’s recall
1. Match the following:
Diwani Tipu Sultan
“Tiger of Mysore” right to collect land revenue
faujdari adalat Sepoy
Rani Channamma criminal court
sipahi led an anti-British
movement in Kitoor
2. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The British conquest of Bengal began with the
Battle of ___________.
(b) Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan were the rulers of
___________.
24
OUR PASTS
– III(c) Dalhousie implemented the Doctrine of ___________.
(d) Maratha kingdoms were located mainly in the
___________ part of India.
3. State whether true or false:
(a) The Mughal empire became stronger in the
eighteenth century.
(b) The English East India Company was the only
European company that traded with India.
(c) Maharaja Ranjit Singh was the ruler of Punjab.
(d) The British did not introduce administrative
changes in the territories they conquered.
Let’s discuss
4. What attracted European trading companies to India?
5. What were the areas of conflict between the
Bengal nawabs and the East India Company?
6. How did the assumption of Diwani benefit the East
India Company?
7. Explain the system of “subsidiary alliance”.
8. In what way was the administration of the Company
different from that of Indian rulers?
9. Describe the changes that occurred in the composition
of the Company’s army.
Let’s do
10. After the British conquest of Bengal, Calcutta grew from
a small village to a big city. Find out about the culture,
architecture and the life of Europeans and Indians of the
city during the colonial period.
11. Collect pictures, stories, poems and information about
any of the following – the Rani of Jhansi, Mahadji Sindhia,
Haidar Ali, Maharaja Ranjit Singh, Lord Dalhousie or
any other contemporary ruler of your region.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY
25
3
Ruling the Countryside
Fig. 1 – Robert Clive
accepting the Diwani
of Bengal, Bihar and
Orissa from the Mughal
ruler in 1765
The Company Becomes the Diwan
On 12 August 1765, the Mughal emperor appointed the East India
Company as the Diwan of Bengal. The actual event most probably
took place in Robert Clive’s tent, with a few Englishmen and
Indians as witnesses. But in the painting above, the event is
shown as a majestic occasion, taking place in a grand setting.
The painter was commissioned by Clive to record the memorable
events in Clive’s life. The grant of Diwani clearly was one such
event in British imagination.
As Diwan, the Company became the chief financial
administrator of the territory under its control. Now it had to
think of administering the land and organising its revenue
resources. This had to be done in a way that could yield enough
revenue to meet the growing expenses of the company. A trading
company had also to ensure that it could buy the products it
needed and sell what it wanted.
26
OUR PASTS
– IIIOver the years the Company also learnt that it had to
move with some caution. Being an alien power, it needed
to pacify those who in the past had ruled the countryside,
and enjoyed authority and prestige. Those who had held
local power had to be controlled but they could not be
entirely eliminated.
How was this to be done? In this chapter we will see
how the Company came to colonise the countryside, organise
revenue resources, redefine the rights of people, and produce
the crops it wanted.
Revenue for the Company
The Company had become the Diwan, but it still saw itself
primarily as a trader. It wanted a large revenue income but
was unwilling to set up any regular system of assessment
and collection. The effort was to increase the revenue as much
as it could and buy fine cotton and silk cloth as cheaply as
possible. Within five years the value of goods bought by the
Company in Bengal doubled. Before 1865, the Company had
purchased goods in India by importing gold and silver from
Britain. Now the revenue collected in Bengal could finance
the purchase of goods for export.
Soon it was clear that the Bengal economy was facing
a deep crisis. Artisans were deserting villages since they
were being forced to sell their goods to the Company at low
prices. Peasants were unable to pay the dues that were being
demanded from them. Artisanal production was in decline,
and agricultural cultivation showed signs of collapse. Then
in 1770 a terrible famine killed ten million people in Bengal.
About one-third of the population was wiped out.
Fig. 2 – A weekly market
in Murshidabad in Bengal
Peasants and artisans
from rural areas regularly
came to these weekly
markets (haats) to sell
their goods and buy what
they needed. These markets
were badly affected during
times of economic crisis.
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE
27The need to improve agriculture
Fig. 3 – Charles Cornwallis
Cornwallis was the Governor-
General of India when the
Permanent Settlement was
introduced.
Source 1
Colebrook on
Bengal ryots
In many villages of
Bengal, some of the
powerful ryots did not
cultivate, but instead
gave out their lands to
others (the under-tenants),
taking from them very
high rents. In 1806, H. T.
Colebrook described the
conditions of these under-
tenants in Bengal:
The under-tenants,
depressed
by
an
excessive rent in kind,
and by usurious returns
for the cattle, seed, and
subsistence, advanced
to them, can never
extricate themselves
from debt. In so abject
a state, they cannot
labour in spirit, while
they earn a scanty
subsistence without
hope of bettering their
situation.
28
OUR PASTS
H.T.
– III
If the economy was in ruins, could the Company be
certain of its revenue income? Most Company officials
began to feel that investment in land had to be
encouraged and agriculture had to be improved.
How was this to be done? After two decades of debate
on the question, the Company finally introduced the
Permanent Settlement in 1793. By the terms of the
settlement, the rajas and taluqdars were recognised
as zamindars. They were asked to collect rent from
the peasants and pay revenue to the Company. The
amount to be paid was fixed permanently, that is, it
was not to be increased ever in future. It was felt that
this would ensure a regular flow of revenue into the
Company’s coffers and at the same time encourage
the zamindars to invest in improving the land. Since
the revenue demand of the state would not be
increased, the zamindar would benefit from increased
production from the land.
The problem
The Permanent Settlement, however, created problems.
Company officials soon discovered that the zamindars
were in fact not investing in the improvement of land.
The revenue that had been fixed was so high that the
zamindars found it difficult to pay. Anyone who failed to
pay the revenue lost his zamindari. Numerous zamindaris
were sold off at auctions organised by the Company.
By the first decade of the nineteenth century the
situation changed. The prices in the market rose and
cultivation slowly expanded. This meant an increase in
the income of the zamindars but no gain for the
Company since it could not increase a revenue demand
that had been fixed permanently
Even then the zamindars did not have an interest in
improving the land. Some had lost their lands in the
earlier years of the settlement; others now saw the
possibility of earning without the trouble and risk of
investment. As long as the zamindars could give out the
land to tenants and get rent, they were not interested in
improving the land.
Activity
Why do you think Colebrook is concerned with the
conditions of the under-ryots in Bengal? Read the
preceding pages and suggest possible reasons.On the other hand, in the villages, the cultivator
found the system extremely oppressive. The rent he paid
to the zamindar was high and his right on the land was
insecure. To pay the rent he had to often take a loan
from the moneylender, and when he failed to pay the
rent he was evicted from the land he had cultivated
for generations.
Mahal – In British
revenue records mahal
is a revenue estate
which may be a village
or a group of villages.
A new system is devised
By the early nineteenth century many of the Company
officials were convinced that the system of revenue
had to be changed again. How could revenues be fixed
permanently at a time when the Company needed
more money to meet its expenses of administration
and trade?
In the North Wester n Provinces of the Bengal
Presidency (most of this area is now in Uttar Pradesh),
an Englishman called Holt Mackenzie devised the new
system which came into effect in 1822. He felt that
the village was an important social institution in north
Indian society and needed to be preserved. Under
his directions, collectors went from village to village,
inspecting the land, measuring the fields, and recording
the customs and rights of different groups. The
estimated revenue of each plot within a village
was added up to calculate the revenue that each
village (mahal) had to pay. This demand was to be
revised periodically, not permanently fixed. The charge
of collecting the revenue and paying it to the Company
was given to the village headman, rather than the
zamindar. This system came to be known as the
mahalwari settlement.
Fig. 4 – Thomas Munro, Governor
of Madras (1819 -26)
The Munro system
In the British territories in the south there was a similar
move away from the idea of Permanent Settlement. The
new system that was devised came to be known as the
ryotwar (or ryotwari ). It was tried on a small scale by
Captain Alexander Read in some of the areas that were
taken over by the Company after the wars with Tipu
Sultan. Subsequently developed by Thomas Munro, this
system was gradually extended all over south India.
Read and Munro felt that in the south there were no
traditional zamindars. The settlement, they argued, had
to be made directly with the cultivators (ryots) who had
tilled the land for generations. Their fields had to be
carefully and separately surveyed before the revenue
assessment was made. Munro thought that the British
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE
29Activity
Imagine that you are a
Company representative
sending a report back
to England about the
conditions in rural areas
under Company rule.
What would you write?
should act as paternal father figures protecting the ryots
under their charge.
All was not well
Within a few years after the new systems were imposed
it was clear that all was not well with them. Driven by
the desire to increase the income from land, revenue
officials fixed too high a revenue demand. Peasants were
unable to pay, ryots fled the countryside, and villages
became deserted in many regions. Optimistic officials
had imagined that the new systems would transform
the peasants into rich enterprising farmers. But this
did not happen.
Crops for Europe
The British also realised that the countryside could
not only yield revenue, it could also grow the crops
that Europe required. By the late eighteenth century
the Company was trying its best to expand the
cultivation of opium and indigo. In the century and a
half that followed, the British persuaded or forced
cultivators in various parts of India to produce other
crops: jute in Bengal, tea in Assam, sugarcane in the
United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh), wheat in Punjab,
cotton in Maharashtra and Punjab, rice in Madras.
How was this done? The British used a variety of
methods to expand the cultivation of crops that they
needed. Let us take a closer look at the story of one such
crop, one such method of production.
Does colour have a
history?
Fig. 5 – A kalamkari print,
twentieth- century India
30
OUR PASTS
– III
Fig. 6 – A Morris cotton print, late-
nineteenth-century England
Figs. 5 and 6 are two
images of cotton prints.
The image on the
left (Fig. 5) shows a
kalamkari print created
by weavers of Andhra
Pradesh in India. On
the right is a floral
cotton print designed
and
produced
by
William Morris, a
famous poet and artist
of nineteenth-century
Britain. There is one
thing common in thetwo prints: both use a rich blue colour – commonly called
indigo. Do you know how this colour was produced?
The blue that you see in these prints was produced
from a plant called indigo. It is likely that the blue dye
used in the Morris prints in nineteenth-century Britain
was manufactured from indigo plants cultivated in India.
For India was the biggest supplier of indigo in the world
at that time.
Why the demand for Indian indigo?
The indigo plant grows primarily in the tropics. By the
thirteenth century Indian indigo was being used by cloth
manufacturers in Italy, France and Britain to dye cloth.
However, only small amounts of Indian indigo reached
the European market and its price was very high.
European cloth manufacturers therefore had to depend
on another plant called woad to make violet and blue
dyes. Being a plant of the temperate zones, woad was
more easily available in Europe. It was grown in northern
Italy, southern France and in parts of Germany and
Britain. Worried by the competition from indigo, woad
producers in Europe pressurised their governments to
ban the import of indigo.
Cloth dyers, however, preferred indigo as a dye. Indigo
produced a rich blue colour, whereas the dye from woad
was pale and dull. By the seventeenth century, European
cloth producers persuaded their governments to relax
the ban on indigo import. The French began cultivating
indigo in St Domingue in the Caribbean islands, the
Portuguese in Brazil, the English in Jamaica, and the
Spanish in Venezuela. Indigo plantations also came up
in many parts of North America.
By the end of the eighteenth century, the demand for
Indian indigo grew further. Britain began to industrialise,
and its cotton production expanded dramatically, creating
an enormous new demand for cloth dyes. While the
demand for indigo increased, its existing supplies from
the West Indies and America collapsed for a variety of
reasons. Between 1783 and 1789 the production of
indigo in the world fell by half. Cloth dyers in Britain
now desperately looked for new sources of indigo supply.
From where could this indigo be procured?
Plantation – A
large farm operated
by a planter
employing various
forms of forced
labour. Plantations
are associated with
the production of
coffee, sugarcane,
tobacco, tea and
cotton.
Britain turns to India
Faced with the rising demand for indigo in Europe, the
Company in India looked for ways to expand the area
under indigo cultivation.
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE
31Fig. 7 – The Slave Revolt in
St Domingue, August 1791,
painting by January Scuhodolski
In the eighteenth century,
French planters produced indigo
and sugar in the French colony
of St Domingue in the Caribbean
islands. The African slaves who
worked on the plantations rose
in rebellion in 1791, burning the
plantations and killing their rich
planters. In 1792 France abolished
slavery in the French colonies.
These events led to the collapse
of the indigo plantations on the
Caribbean islands.
From the last decades
of the eighteenth century
indigo cultivation in
Bengal expanded rapidly
and Bengal indigo came
to dominate the world
market. In 1788 only about
30 per cent of the indigo
imported into Britain was
from India. By 1810, the
proportion had gone up to
95 per cent.
As the indigo trade
grew, commercial agents
and officials of the
Company began investing
in indigo production. Over
the years many Company
officials left their jobs to
look after their indigo
business. Attracted by the prospect of high profits,
numerous Scotsmen and Englishmen came to India and
became planters. Those who had no money to produce
indigo could get loans from the Company and the banks
that were coming up at the time.
How was indigo cultivated?
There were two main systems of indigo cultivation – nij
and ryoti. Within the system of nij cultivation, the
planter produced indigo in lands that he directly
controlled. He either bought the land or rented it from
other zamindars and produced indigo by directly
employing hired labourers.
The problem with nij cultivation
Slave – A person who is
owned by someone else –
the slave owner. A slave
has no freedom and is
compelled to work for
the master.
32
OUR PASTS
– III
The planters found it difficult to expand the area under
nij cultivation. Indigo could be cultivated only on fertile
lands, and these were all already densely populated.
Only small plots scattered over the landscape could be
acquired. Planters needed large areas in compact blocks
to cultivate indigo in plantations. Where could they get
such land from? They attempted to lease in the land
around the indigo factory, and evict the peasants from
the area. But this always led to conflicts and tension.
Nor was labour easy to mobilise. A large plantation
required a vast number of hands to operate. And labour
was needed precisely at a time when peasants were
usually busy with their rice cultivation.Nij cultivation on a large scale also required many
ploughs and bullocks. One bigha of indigo cultivation
required two ploughs. This meant that a planter with
1,000 bighas would need 2,000 ploughs. Investing on
purchase and maintenance of ploughs was a big
problem. Nor could supplies be easily got from the
peasants since their ploughs and bullocks were busy
on their rice fields, again exactly at the time that the
indigo planters needed them.
Till the late nineteenth century, planters were therefore
reluctant to expand the area under nij cultivation. Less
than 25 per cent of the land producing indigo was under
this system. The rest was under an alternative mode of
cultivation – the ryoti system.
Bigha – A unit of
measurement of land.
Before British rule, the
size of this area varied.
In Bengal the British
standardised it to about
one-third of an acre.
Indigo on the land of ryots
Under the ryoti system, the planters
forced the ryots to sign a contract,
an agreement (satta). At times
they pressurised the village
headmen to sign the contract
on behalf of the ryots. Those
who signed the contract got
cash advances from the
planters at low rates of interest
to produce indigo. But the loan
committed the ryot to cultivating
indigo on at least 25 per cent of
the area under his holding. The
planter provided the seed and the
drill, while the cultivators prepared
the soil, sowed the seed and looked after the crop.
Fig. 8 – Workers harvesting
indigo in early-nineteenth-century
Bengal. From Colesworthy Grant,
Rural Life in Bengal, 1860
In India the indigo plant was
cut mostly by men.
Fig. 9 – The Indigo plant being
brought from the fields to the
factory
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE
33How was indigo produced?
Fermenting
Vat
Beater
Vat
Fig. 10 – An indigo factory located near indigo fields, painting by
William Simpson, 1863
Fig. 11 – Women usually
carried the indigo plant to
the vats.
Fig. 12 – The Vat-Beater
The indigo worker
here is standing with
the paddle that was
used to stir the
solution in the vat.
These workers had to
remain in waist-deep
water for over eight
hours to beat the
indigo solution.
Vat – A fermenting
or storage vessel
34
OUR PASTS
The indigo villages were usually around indigo factories owned
by planters. After harvest, the indigo plant was taken to the
vats in the indigo factory. Three or four vats were needed to
manufacture the dye. Each vat had a separate function. The
leaves stripped off the indigo plant were first soaked in warm
water in a vat (known as the fermenting or steeper vat) for several
hours. When the plants fermented, the liquid began to boil and
bubble. Now the rotten leaves were taken out and the liquid
drained into another vat that was placed just below the first vat.
In the second vat (known as the beater vat) the solution was
continuously stirred and beaten with paddles. When the liquid
gradually turned green and then blue, lime water was added to
the vat. Gradually the indigo separated out in flakes, a muddy
sediment settled at the bottom of the vat and a clear liquid rose
to the surface. The liquid was drained off and the sediment –
the indigo pulp – transferred
to another vat (known as
the settling vat), and
then pressed and
dried for sale.
Fig. 13 – The indigo
is ready for sale
Here you can see the last stage of the production –
workers stamping and cutting the indigo pulp that
has been pressed and moulded. In the background you
can see a worker carrying away the blocks for drying.
– III
Fig. 8When the crop was delivered to the planter after the
harvest, a new loan was given to the ryot, and the cycle
started all over again. Peasants who were initially
tempted by the loans soon realised how harsh the system
was. The price they got for the indigo they produced
was very low and the cycle of loans never ended.
There were other problems too. The planters usually
insisted that indigo be cultivated on the best soils in
which peasants preferred to cultivate rice. Indigo,
moreover, had deep roots and it exhausted the soil
rapidly. After an indigo harvest the land could not be
sown with rice.
The “Blue Rebellion” and After
In March 1859 thousands of ryots in Bengal refused to
grow indigo. As the rebellion spread, ryots refused to
pay rents to the planters, and attacked indigo factories
armed with swords and spears, bows and arrows.
Women turned up to fight with pots, pans and kitchen
implements. Those who worked for the planters were
socially boycotted, and the gomasthas – agents of
planters – who came to collect rent were beaten up.
Ryots swore they would no longer take advances to sow
indigo nor be bullied by the planters’ lathiyals – the
lathi-wielding strongmen maintained by the planters.
Why did the indigo peasants decide that they would
no longer remain silent? What gave them the power
to rebel? Clearly, the indigo system was intensely
oppressive. But those who are oppressed do not always
rise up in rebellion. They do so only at times.
In 1859, the indigo ryots felt that they had the
support of the local zamindars and village headmen in
their rebellion against the planters. In many villages,
headmen who had been forced to sign indigo contracts,
mobilised the indigo peasants and fought pitched
battles with the lathiyals. In other places even the
zamindars went around villages urging the ryots to
resist the planters. These zamindars were unhappy with
the increasing power of the planters and angry at being
forced by the planters to give them land on long leases.
The indigo peasants also imagined that the British
government would support them in their struggle
against the planters. After the Revolt of 1857 the
British government was particularly worried about the
possibility of another popular rebellion. When the news
spread of a simmering revolt in the indigo districts,
Source 2
A song from an
indigo-producing
village
In moments of struggle
people often sing songs
to inspire each other
and to build a sense of
collective unity. Such
songs give us a glimpse
of their feelings. During
the indigo rebellion
many such songs could
be heard in the villages
of lower Bengal. Here is
one such song:
The long lathis
wielded
by
the
planter of Mollahati /
now lie in a cluster
The babus of Kolkata
have sailed down /
to see the great fight
This time the raiyats
are all ready, / they
will no longer be
beaten in silence
They will no longer
give up their life /
without fighting the
lathiyals.
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE
35the Lieutenant Governor toured the region in the winter
of 1859. The ryots saw the tour as a sign of government
sympathy for their plight. When in Barasat, the
magistrate Ashley Eden issued a notice stating that
ryots would not be compelled to accept indigo contracts,
word went around that Queen Victoria had declared
that indigo need not be sown. Eden was trying to placate
the peasants and control an explosive situation, but
his action was read as support for the rebellion.
As the rebellion spread, intellectuals from Calcutta
rushed to the indigo districts. They wrote of the misery
of the ryots, the tyranny of the planters, and the horrors
of the indigo system.
Worried by the rebellion, the government brought
in the military to protect the planters from assault,
and set up the Indigo Commission to enquire into the
system of indigo production. The Commission held the
planters guilty, and criticised them for the coercive
methods they used with indigo cultivators. It declared
that indigo production was not profitable for ryots. The
Commission asked the ryots to fulfil their existing
contracts but also told them that they could refuse to
produce indigo in future.
Source 3
“I would rather beg than sow indigo”
Hadji Mulla, an indigo cultivator of Chandpore, Thana
Hardi, was interviewed by the members of the Indigo
Commission on Tuesday, 5 June 1860. This is what he
said in answer to some of the questions:
W. S. Seton Karr, President of the Indigo
Commission: Are you now willing to sow indigo;
and if not on what fresh terms would you be willing
to do it?
Activity
Imagine you are a
witness giving evidence
before the Indigo
Commission. W.S. Seton
Karr asks you “On what
condition will ryots grow
indigo?” What will your
answer be?
36
OUR PASTS
– III
Hadji Mulla: I am not willing to sow, and I don’t
know that any fresh terms would satisfy me.
Mr Sale: Would you not be willing to sow at a
rupee a bundle?
Hadji Mulla: No I would not; rather than sow
indigo I will go to another country; I would rather
beg than sow indigo.
Indigo Commission Report, Vol. II, Minutes of Evidence, p. 67After the revolt, indigo production collapsed in Bengal. But
the planters now shifted their operation to Bihar. With the
discovery of synthetic dyes in the late nineteenth century their
business was severely affected, but yet they managed to expand
production. When Mahatma Gandhi returned from South
Africa, a peasant from Bihar persuaded him to visit Champaran
and see the plight of the indigo cultivators there. Mahatma
Gandhi’s visit in 1917 marked the beginning of the Champaran
movement against the indigo planters.
ELSEWHERE
Indigo making in the West Indies
In the early eighteenth century, a French missionary, Jean Baptiste Labat,
travelled to the Caribbean islands, and wrote extensively about the region.
Published in one of his
books, this image shows
all the stages of indigo
production in the French
slave plantations of
the region.
You can see the slave
workers putting the
indigo plant into the
settler vat on the left.
Another
worker
is
churning the liquid with
a mechanical churner
in a vat (second from
right). Two workers are
Fig. 14 – Making indigo in a Caribbean slave plantation
carrying the indigo pulp
hung up in bags to be dried. In the foreground two others are mixing the indigo
pulp to be put into moulds. The planter is at the centre of the picture standing on
the high ground supervising the slave workers.
Let’s recall
1. Match the following:
ryot village
mahal peasant
nij cultivation on ryot’s lands
ryoti cultivation on planter’s own land
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE
372. Fill in the blanks:
Let’s imagine
Imagine a
conversation between
a planter and a
peasant who is being
forced to grow indigo.
What reasons would
the planter give to
persuade the peasant?
What problems would
the peasant point
out? Enact their
conversation.
(a) Growers of woad in Europe saw __________
as a crop which would provide competition to
their earnings.
(b) The demand for indigo increased in late-
eighteenth-century Britain because of __________.
(c) The international demand for indigo was
affected by the discovery of __________.
(d) The Champaran movement was against
__________.
Let’s discuss
3. Describe the main features of the Permanent
Settlement.
4. How was the mahalwari system different from the
Permanent Settlement?
5. Give two problems which arose with the new Munro
system of fixing revenue.
6. Why were ryots reluctant to grow indigo?
7. What were the circumstances which led to the
eventual collapse of indigo production in Bengal?
Let’s do
8. Find out more about the Champaran movement
and Mahatma Gandhi’s role in it.
9. Look into the history of either tea or coffee
plantations in India. See how the life of workers in
these plantations was similar to or different from
that of workers in indigo plantations.
38
OUR PASTS
– III
4
Tribals, Dikus and the Vision of
a Golden Age
In 1895, a man named Birsa was seen roaming the forests
and villages of Chottanagpur in Jharkhand. People said he
had miraculous powers – he could cure all diseases and
multiply grain. Birsa himself declared that God had
appointed him to save his people from trouble, free them
from the slavery of dikus (outsiders). Soon thousands began
following Birsa, believing that he was bhagwan (God) and
had come to solve all their problems.
Birsa was born in a family of Mundas – a tribal group that
lived in Chottanagpur. But his followers included other
tribals of the region – Santhals and Oraons. All of them in
different ways were unhappy with the changes they
were experiencing and the problems they were facing under
British rule. Their familiar ways of life
seemed to be disappearing, their livelihoods
were under threat, and their religion appeared
to be in danger.
What problems did Birsa set out to
resolve? Who were the outsiders being
referred to as dikus, and how did they enslave
the people of the region? What was happening
to the tribal people under the British? How
did their lives change? These are some of the
questions you will read about in this chapter.
You have read about tribal societies last
year. Most tribes had customs and rituals
that were very different from those laid
down by Brahmans. These societies also
did not have the sharp social divisions that
were characteristic of caste societies. All
those who belonged to the same tribe thought
of themselves as sharing common ties
of kinship. However, this did not mean
that there were no social and economic
differences within tribes.
Fig. 1 – Women of the
Dongria Kandha tribe in
Orissa wade through
the river on the way to
the market
39How Did Tribal Groups Live?
By the nineteenth century, tribal people in different
parts of India were involved in a variety of activities.
Some were jhum cultivators
Fallow – A field left
uncultivated for a while
so that the soil recovers
fertility
Sal – A tree
Mahua – A flower that
is eaten or used to make
alcohol
Some of them practised jhum cultivation, that is, shifting
cultivation. This was done on small patches of land,
mostly in forests. The cultivators cut the treetops to
allow sunlight to reach the ground, and burnt the
vegetation on the land to clear it for cultivation. They
spread the ash from the firing, which contained potash,
to fertilise the soil. They used the axe to cut trees and
the hoe to scratch the soil in order to prepare it for
cultivation. They broadcast the seeds, that is, scattered
the seeds on the field instead of ploughing the land
and sowing the seeds. Once the crop was ready and
harvested, they moved to another field. A field that had
been cultivated once was left fallow for several years,
Shifting cultivators were found in the hilly and
forested tracts of north-east and central India. The lives
of these tribal people depended on free movement within
forests and on being able to use the land and forests
for growing their crops. That is the only way they could
practise shifting cultivation.
Some were hunters and gatherers
Fig. 2 – Dongria Kandha women
in Orissa take home pandanus
leaves from the forest to make
plates
40
OUR PASTS
– III
In many regions tribal groups lived by hunting animals
and gathering forest produce. They saw forests as
essential for survival. The Khonds were such a
community living in the forests of Orissa. They regularly
went out on collective hunts and then divided the
meat amongst themselves. They ate fruits and roots
collected from the forest
and cooked food with the
oil they extracted from
the seeds of the sal and
mahua. They used many
forest shrubs and herbs
for medicinal purposes,
and sold forest produce in
the local markets. The
local weavers and leather
workers turned to the
Khonds when they needed
supplies of kusum and
palash flowers to colour
their clothes and leather.From where did these forest
people get their supplies of rice
and other grains? At times they
exchanged goods – getting what
they needed in return for their
valuable forest produce. At other
times they bought goods with the
small amount of earnings they
had. Some of them did odd jobs
in the villages, carrying loads or
building roads, while others
laboured in the fields of peasants
and farmers. When supplies of
forest produce shrank, tribal
people had to increasingly
wander around in search of work
as labourers. But many of
them – like the Baigas of central
India – were reluctant to do
work for others. The Baigas saw
themselves as people of the
forest, who could only live on the
produce of the forest. It was
below the dignity of a Baiga to
become a labourer.
Tribal groups often needed to
buy and sell in order to be able
to get the goods that were not produced within the
locality. This led to their dependence on traders and
moneylenders. Traders came around with things for
sale, and sold the goods at high prices. Moneylenders
gave loans with which the tribals met their cash needs,
adding to what they earned. But the interest charged
on the loans was usually very high. So for the tribals,
market and commerce often meant debt and poverty.
They therefore came to see the moneylender and trader
as evil outsiders and the cause of their misery.
Fig. 3 – Location of some tribal
groups in India
Some herded animals
Many tribal groups lived by herding and rearing animals.
They were pastoralists who moved with their herds of
cattle or sheep according to the seasons. When the grass
in one place was exhausted, they moved to another area.
The Van Gujjars of the Punjab hills and the Labadis of
Andhra Pradesh were cattle herders, the Gaddis of Kulu
were shepherds, and the Bakarwals of Kashmir reared
goats. You will read more about them in your history
book next year.
TRIBALS , DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE
41Source 1
A time to hunt, a time to sow, a time to move to a new field
Have you ever noticed that people living in different types of societies do not
share the same notion of work and time? The lives of the shifting cultivators and
hunters in different regions were regulated by a calendar and division of tasks
for men and women.
Verrier Elwin, a British anthropologist who lived among the Baigas and
Khonds of central India for many years in the 1930s and 1940s, gives us a picture
of what this calendar and division of tasks was like. He writes:
In Chait women went to clearings to ... cut stalks that were already reaped;
men cut large trees and go for their ritual hunt. The hunt began at full moon
from the east. Traps of bamboo were used for hunting. The women gathered
fruits like sago, tamarind and mushroom. Baiga women can only gather roots
or kanda and mahua seeds. Of all the adivasis in Central India, the Baigas
were known as the best hunters ... In Baisakh the firing of the forest took
place, the women gathered unburnt wood to burn. Men continued to hunt,
but nearer their villages. In Jeth sowing took place and hunting still went on.
From Asadh to Bhadon the men worked in the fields. In Kuar the first fruits of
beans were ripened and in Kartik kutki became ripe. In Aghan every crop was
ready and in Pus winnowing took place.
Pus was also the time for dances and
marriages. In Magh shifts were made to
new bewars and hunting-gathering was
the main subsistence activity.
The cycle described above took place
in the first year. In the second year there
was more time for hunting as only a few
crops had to be sown and harvested. But
since there was enough food the men
lived in the bewars. It was only in the
third year that the diet had to be
supplemented with the forest products.
Adapted from Verrier Elwin, Baiga (1939) and
Elwin’s unpublished ‘Notes on the Khonds’ (Verrier
Elwin Papers, Nehru Memorial Museum and Library)
Fig. 4 – A Santhal girl carrying firewood,
Bihar, 1946
Children go with their mothers to the
forest to gather forest produce.
42
OUR PASTS
– III
Activity
Look carefully at the tasks that
Baiga men and women did. Do you
see any pattern? What were the
differences in the types of work
that they were expected to perform?Some took to settled cultivation
Even before the nineteenth century, many from within
the tribal groups had begun settling down, and
cultivating their fields in one place year after year,
instead of moving from place to place. They began to
use the plough, and gradually got rights over the land
they lived on. In many cases, like the Mundas of
Chottanagpur, the land belonged to the clan as a whole.
All members of the clan were regarded as descendants
of the original settlers, who had first cleared the land.
Therefore, all of them had rights on the land. Very often
some people within the clan acquired more power
than others, some became chiefs and others followers.
Powerful men often rented out their land instead of
cultivating it themselves.
British officials saw settled tribal groups like the
Gonds and Santhals as more civilised than hunter -
gatherers or shifting cultivators. Those who lived in
the forests were considered to be wild and savage: they
needed to be settled and civilised.
Bewar – A term used
in Madhya Pradesh for
shifting cultivation
How Did Colonial Rule Affect Tribal
Lives?
The lives of tribal groups changed during British rule.
Let us see what these changes were.
What happened to tribal chiefs?
Before the arrival of the British, in many areas the
tribal chiefs were important people. They enjoyed a
certain amount of economic power and had the right to
administer and control their territories. In some places
they had their own police and decided on the local rules
of land and forest management. Under British rule,
the functions and powers of the tribal chiefs changed
considerably. They were allowed to keep their land titles
over a cluster of villages and rent out lands, but they
lost much of their administrative power and were forced
to follow laws made by British officials in India. They
also had to pay tribute to the British, and discipline
the tribal groups on behalf of the British. They lost the
authority they had earlier enjoyed amongst their people,
and were unable to fulfil their traditional functions.
What happened to the shifting cultivators? Fig. 5 – A log house being built in
a village of the Nishi tribals of the
Northeast.
The British were uncomfortable with groups who moved
about and did not have a fixed home. They wanted tribal The entire village helps when log
huts are built.
TRIBALS , DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE
43Fig. 6 – Bhil women cultivating in
a forest in Gujarat
Shifting cultivation continues
in many forest areas of Gujarat.
You can see that trees have been
cut and land cleared to create
patches for cultivation.
groups to settle down and become peasant cultivators.
Settled peasants were easier to control and administer
than people who were always on the move. The British
also wanted a regular revenue source for the state. So
they introduced land settlements – that is, they
measured the land, defined the rights of each individual
to that land, and fixed the revenue demand for the state.
Some peasants were declared landowners, others
tenants. As you have seen (Chapter 2), the tenants
were to pay rent to the landowner who in turn paid
revenue to the state.
The British effort to settle jhum cultivators was not
very successful. Settled plough cultivation is not easy
in areas where water is scarce and the soil is dry. In
fact, jhum cultivators who took to plough cultivation
often suffered, since their fields did not produce good
yields. So the jhum cultivators in north-east India
insisted on continuing with their traditional practice.
Facing widespread protests, the British had to
ultimately allow them the right to carry on shifting
cultivation in some parts of the forest.
Fig. 7 – T ribal workers in a rice field in Andhra Pradesh
Note the difference between rice cultivation in the flat plains and in
the forests.
44
OUR PASTS
– IIIForest laws and their impact
The life of tribal groups, as you have seen, was directly
connected to the forest. So changes in forest laws had
a considerable effect on tribal lives. The British extended
their control over all forests and declared that forests
were state property. Some forests were classified as
Reserved Forests for they produced timber which the
British wanted. In these forests people were not allowed
to move freely, practise jhum cultivation, collect fruits,
or hunt animals. How were jhum cultivators to survive
in such a situation? Many were therefore forced to move
to other areas in search of work and livelihood.
But once the British stopped the tribal people from
living inside forests, they faced a problem. From where
would the Forest Department get its labour to cut trees
for railway sleepers and to transport logs?
Colonial officials came up with a solution. They
decided that they would give jhum cultivators small
patches of land in the forests and allow them to cultivate
these on the condition that those who lived in the
villages would have to provide labour to the Forest
Department and look after the forests. So in many
regions the Forest Department established forest
villages to ensure a regular supply of cheap labour.
Sleeper – The horizontal
planks of wood on which
railway lines are laid
Source 2
“In this land of the English how hard it is to live”
In the1930s Verrier Elwin visited the land of the Baigas – a tribal group in
central India. He wanted to know about them – their customs and practices,
their art and folklore. He recorded many songs that lamented the hard
time the Baigas were having under British rule.
In this land of the English how hard it is to live
How hard it is to live
In the village sits the landlord
In the gate sits the Kotwar
In the garden sits the Patwari
In the field sits the government
In this land of the English how hard it is to live
To pay cattle tax we have to sell cow
To pay forest tax we have to sell buffalo
To pay land tax we have to sell bullock
How are we to get our food?
In this land of the English
Quoted in Verrier Elwin and Shamrao Hivale, Songs of the Maikal, p. 316.
TRIBALS , DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE
45Many tribal groups reacted against the
colonial forest laws. They disobeyed the
new rules, continued with practices that
were declared illegal, and at times rose
in open rebellion. Such was the revolt of
Songram Sangma in 1906 in Assam, and
the forest satyagraha of the 1930s in the
Central Provinces.
The problem with trade
Fig. 8 – Godara women weaving
Fig. 9 – A Hajang
woman weaving a mat
For women, domestic
work was not confined
to the home. They
carried their babies
with them to the
fields and the
factories.
46
OUR PASTS
– III
During the nineteenth century, tribal
groups found that traders and money-
lenders were coming into the forests
more often, wanting to buy forest
produce, offering cash loans, and asking
them to work for wages. It took tribal
groups some time to understand the
consequences of what was happening.
Let us consider the case of the silk
growers. In the eighteenth century, Indian
silk was in demand in European markets.
The fine quality of Indian silk was highly
valued and exports from India increased
rapidly. As the market expanded, East India Company
officials tried to encourage silk production to meet the
growing demand.
Hazaribagh, in present-day Jharkhand, was an area
where the Santhals reared cocoons. The
traders dealing in silk sent in their
agents who gave loans to the tribal
people and collected the cocoons.
The growers were paid Rs 3 to Rs 4
for a thousand cocoons. These
were then exported to
Burdwan or Gaya where
they were sold at five
times the price. The
middlemen – so called
because they arranged
deals
between
the
exporters
and
silk
growers – made huge
profits. The silk growers
earned
very
little.
Understandably, many
tribal groups saw the
market and the traders
as their main enemies.Fig. 10 – Coal miners of
Bihar, 1948
In the 1920s about 50 per
cent of the miners in the
Jharia and Raniganj coal
mines of Bihar were
tribals. Work deep down in
the dark and suffocating
mines was not only back-
breaking and dangerous, it
was often literally killing.
In the 1920s over 2,000
workers died every year in
the coal mines in India.
The search for work
The plight of the tribals who had to go far away from their
homes in search of work was even worse. From the late
nineteenth century, tea plantations started coming up and
mining became an important industry. Tribals were recruited
in large numbers to work the tea plantations of Assam and
the coal mines of Jharkhand. They were recruited through
contractors who paid them miserably low wages, and
prevented them from returning home.
A Closer Look
Through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, tribal groups
in different parts of the country rebelled against the changes
in laws, the restrictions on their practices, the new taxes
they had to pay, and the exploitation by traders and
moneylenders. The Kols rebelled in 1831-32, Santhals rose
in revolt in 1855, the Bastar Rebellion in central India broke
out in 1910 and the Warli Revolt in Maharashtra in 1940.
The movement that Birsa led was one such movement.
Activity
Find out whether
the conditions of
work in the mines
have changed
now. Check how
many people die in
mines every year,
and what are the
reasons for their
death.
TRIBALS , DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE
47Source 3
Birsa Munda
‘Blood trickles from
my shoulders’
The songs the Mundas
sang bemoaned their
misery.
Alas! under [the
drudgery of] forced
labour
Blood trickles from
my shoulders
Day and night the
emissary from the
zamindars,
Annoys and irritates
me, day and night I
groan
Alas! This is my
condition
I do not have a home,
where shall I get
happiness
Alas!
K.S. Singh, Birsa Munda and
His Movement, p.12.
Vaishnav – Worshippers
of Vishnu
48
OUR PASTS
– III
Birsa was born in the mid-1870s. The son of a poor
father, he grew up around the forests of Bohonda,
grazing sheep, playing the flute, and dancing in the
local akhara. Forced by poverty, his father had to move
from place to place looking for work. As an adolescent,
Birsa heard tales of the Munda uprisings of the past
and saw the sirdars (leaders) of the community urging
the people to revolt. They talked of a golden age when the
Mundas had been free of the oppression of dikus, and
said there would be a time when the ancestral right of
the community would be restored. They saw themselves
as the descendants of the original settlers of the region,
fighting for their land (mulk ki larai), reminding people
of the need to win back their kingdom.
Birsa went to the local missionary school, and
listened to the sermons of missionaries. There too he
heard it said that it was possible for the Mundas to
attain the Kingdom of Heaven, and regain their lost
rights. This would be possible if they became good
Christians and gave up their “bad practices”. Later Birsa
also spent some time in the company of a prominent
Vaishnav preacher. He wore the sacred thread, and
began to value the importance of purity and piety.
Birsa was deeply influenced by many of the ideas he
came in touch with in his growing-up years. His
movement was aimed at reforming tribal society. He
urged the Mundas to give up drinking liquor, clean their
village, and stop believing in witchcraft and sorcery. But
we must remember that Birsa also turned against
missionaries and Hindu landlords. He saw them as
outside forces that were ruining the Munda way of life.
In 1895 Birsa urged his followers to recover their
glorious past. He talked of a golden age in the past – a
satyug (the age of truth) – when Mundas lived a good
life, constructed embankments, tapped natural springs,
planted trees and orchards, practised cultivation to
earn their living. They did not kill their brethren and
relatives. They lived honestly. Birsa also wanted people
to once again work on their land, settle down and
cultivate their fields.
What worried British officials most was the political
aim of the Birsa movement, for it wanted to drive out
missionaries, moneylenders, Hindu landlords, and the
government and set up a Munda Raj with Birsa at
its head. The movement identified all these forces as
the cause of the misery the Mundas were suffering.The land policies of the British were destroying
their traditional land system, Hindu landlords and
moneylenders were taking over their land, and
missionaries were criticising their traditional culture.
As the movement spread the British officials decided
to act. They arrested Birsa in 1895, convicted him on
charges of rioting and jailed him for two years.
When Birsa was released in 1897 he began touring
the villages to gather support. He used traditional
symbols and language to rouse people, urging them to
destroy “Ravana” (dikus and the Europeans) and
establish a kingdom under his leadership. Birsa’s
followers began targeting the symbols of diku and
European power. They attacked police stations and
churches, and raided the property of moneylenders and
zamindars. They raised the white flag as a symbol of
Birsa Raj.
In 1900 Birsa died of cholera and the movement
faded out. However, the movement was significant
in at least two ways. First – it forced the colonial
government to introduce laws so that the land of the
tribals could not be easily taken over by dikus.
Second – it showed once again that the tribal people
had the capacity to protest against injustice and
express their anger against colonial rule. They did this
in their own specific way, inventing their own rituals
and symbols of struggle.
ELSEWHERE
Why do we
need cash!
There are many reasons why
tribal and other social groups
often do not wish to produce
for the market. This tribal song
from Papua New Guinea gives
us a glimpse of how the tribals
there viewed the market.
We say cash,
Is unsatisfactory trash;
It won’t keep off rain
And it gives me pain
Let’s recall
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The British described the tribal people as
____________.
(b) The method of sowing seeds in jhum cultivation
is known as ____________.
(c) The tribal chiefs got ____________ titles in central
India under the British land settlements.
(d) Tribals went to work in the ____________ of Assam
and the ____________ in Bihar.
So why should I work my guts
From coconut trees
For these government mutts;
Cash cropping is all very well
If you’ve got something to sell
But tell me sir why,
If there’s nothing to buy;
Should I bother?
Adapted from a song quoted in
Cohn, Clarke and Haswell, eds, The
Economy of Subsistence Agriculture,
(1970).
TRIBALS , DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE
492. State whether true or false:
Let’s imagine
Imagine you are a
jhum cultivator living
in a forest village
in the nineteenth
century. You have
just been told that
the land you were
born on no longer
belongs to you. In a
meeting with British
officials you try to
explain the kinds of
problems you face.
What would you say?
(a) Jhum cultivators plough the land and sow
seeds.
(b) Cocoons were bought from the Santhals and
sold by the traders at five times the purchase
price.
(c) Birsa urged his followers to purify themselves,
give up drinking liquor and stop believing in
witchcraft and sorcery.
(d) The British wanted to preserve the tribal way
of life.
Let’s discuss
3. What problems did shifting cultivators face
under British rule?
4. How did the powers of tribal chiefs change under
colonial rule?
5. What accounts for the anger of the tribals against
the dikus?
6. What was Birsa’s vision of a golden age? Why do
you think such a vision appealed to the people of
the region?
Let’s do
7. Find out from your parents, friends or teachers,
the names of some heroes of other tribal revolts in
the twentieth century. Write their story in your
own words.
8. Choose any tribal group living in India today. Find
out about their customs and way of life, and how
their lives have changed in the last 50 years.
50
OUR PASTS
– III
5
When People Rebel
1857 and After
Fig. 1 – Sepoys and peasants
gather forces for the revolt that
spread across the plains of north
India in 1857
Policies and the People
In the previous chapters you looked at the policies of
the East India Company and the effect they had on
different people. Kings, queens, peasants, landlords,
tribals, soldiers were all affected in different ways. You
have also seen how people resist policies and actions
that harm their interests or go against their sentiments.
Nawabs lose their power
Since the mid-eighteenth century, nawabs and rajas
had seen their power erode. They had gradually lost
their authority and honour. Residents had been
stationed in many courts, the freedom of the rulers
reduced, their armed forces disbanded, and their
revenues and territories taken away by stages.
Many ruling families tried to negotiate with the
Company to protect their interests. For example, Rani
Lakshmibai of Jhansi wanted the Company to recognise
her adopted son as the heir to the kingdom after the
death of her husband. Nana Saheb, the adopted son of
51Peshwa Baji Rao II, pleaded that he be given his father’s
pension when the latter died. However, the Company,
confident of its superiority and military powers, turned
down these pleas.
Awadh was one of the last territories to be annexed.
In 1801, a subsidiary alliance was imposed on Awadh,
and in 1856 it was taken over. Governor-General
Dalhousie declared that the territory was being
misgoverned and British rule was needed to ensure
proper administration.
The Company even began to plan how to bring the
Mughal dynasty to an end. The name of the Mughal
king was removed from the coins minted by the
Company. In 1849, Governor-General Dalhousie
announced that after the death of Bahadur Shah Zafar,
the family of the king would be shifted out of the Red
Fort and given another place in Delhi to reside in. In
1856, Governor-General Canning decided that Bahadur
Shah Zafar would be the last Mughal king and after
his death none of his descendants would be recognised
as kings – they would just be called princes.
The peasants and the sepoys
 Activity
Imagine you are a sepoy
in the Company army,
advising your nephew
not to take employment
in the army. What reasons
would you give?
52
OUR PASTS
– III
In the countryside peasants and zamindars resented
the high taxes and the rigid methods of revenue
collection. Many failed to pay back their loans to the
moneylenders and gradually lost the lands they had
tilled for generations.
The Indian sepoys in the employ of the Company
also had reasons for discontent. They were unhappy
about their pay, allowances and conditions of service.
Some of the new rules, moreover, violated their religious
sensibilities and beliefs. Did you know that in those
days many people in the country believed that if they
crossed the sea they would lose their religion and caste?
So when in 1824 the sepoys were told to go to Burma by
the sea route to fight for the Company, they refused to
follow the order, though they agreed to go by the land
route. They were severely punished, and since the issue
did not die down, in 1856 the Company passed a new
law which stated that every new person who took up
employment in the Company’s army had to agree to
serve overseas if required.
Sepoys also reacted to what was happening in the
countryside. Many of them were peasants and had
families living in the villages. So the anger of the
peasants quickly spread among the sepoys.Responses to reforms
The British believed that Indian society had to
be reformed. Laws were passed to stop the
practice of sati and to encourage the remarriage
of widows. English-language education was
actively promoted. After 1830, the Company
allowed Christian missionaries to function
freely in its domain and even own land and
property. In 1850, a new law was passed to
make conversion to Christianity easier. This
law allowed an Indian who had converted to
Christianity to inherit the property of his
ancestors. Many Indians began to feel that the
British were destroying their religion, their
social customs and their traditional way of life.
There were of course other Indians who
wanted to change existing social practices. You
will read about these reformers and reform
movements in Chapter 7.
Through the Eyes of the People
To get a glimpse of what people were thinking
those days about British rule, study Sources 1 and 2.
Fig. 2 – Sepoys exchange news
and rumours in the bazaars of
north India
Source 1
The list of eighty-four rules
Given here are excerpts from the book Majha Pravaas, written by Vishnubhatt
Godse, a Brahman from a village in Maharashtra. He and his uncle had set out
to attend a yajna being organised in Mathura. Vishnubhatt writes that they met
some sepoys on the way who told them that they should not proceed on the
journey because a massive upheaval was going to break out in three days.
The sepoys said:
the English were determined to wipe out the religions of the Hindus and the
Muslims ... they had made a list of eighty-four rules and announced these
in a gathering of all big kings and princes in Calcutta. They said that the
kings refused to accept these rules and warned the English of dire
consequences and massive upheaval if these are implemented ... that the
kings all returned to their capitals in great anger ... all the big people
began making plans. A date was fixed for the war of religion and the secret
plan had been circulated from the cantonment in Meerut by letters sent to
different cantonments.
Vishnubhatt Godse, Majha Pravaas, pp. 23-24.
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL
53Source 2
“There was soon excitement in every regiment”
Another account we have from those days are the memoirs of Subedar Sitaram
Pande. Sitaram Pande was recruited in 1812 as a sepoy in the Bengal Native
Army. He served the English for 48 years and retired in 1860. He helped the
British to suppress the rebellion though his own son was a rebel and was
killed by the British in front of his eyes. On retirement he was persuaded by
his Commanding Officer, Norgate, to write his memoirs. He completed the
writing in 1861 in Awadhi and Norgate translated it into English and had it
published under the title From Sepoy to Subedar.
Here is an excerpt from what Sitaram Pande wrote:
It is my humble opinion that this seizing of Oudh filled the minds of the
Sepoys with distrust and led them to plot against the Government. Agents
of the Nawab of Oudh and also of the King of Delhi were sent all over
India to discover the temper of the army. They worked upon the feelings
of sepoys, telling them how treacherously the foreigners had behaved
towards their king. They invented ten thousand lies and promises to
persuade the soldiers to mutiny and turn against their masters, the English,
with the object of restoring the Emperor of Delhi to the throne. They
maintained that this was wholly within the army’s powers if the soldiers
would only act together and do as they were advised.
Fig. 3 – Rebel sepoys at Meerut attack officers, enter their homes and set fire to buildings
Source 2 contd.
54
OUR PASTS
– IIISource 2 contd.
It chanced that about this time the Sarkar sent
parties of men from each regiment to different
garrisons for instructions in the use of the new rifle.
These men performed the new drill for some time
until a report got about by some means or the other,
that the cartridges used for these new rifles were
greased with the fat of cows and pigs. The men from
our regiment wrote to others in the regiment telling
them about this, and there was soon excitement in
every regiment. Some men pointed out that in forty
years’ service nothing had ever been done by the
Sarkar to insult their religion, but as I have already
mentioned the sepoys’ minds had been inflamed by
the seizure of Oudh. Interested parties were quick
to point out that the great aim of the English was to
turn us all into Christians, and they had therefore
introduced the cartridge in order to bring this about,
since both Mahommedans and Hindus would be
defiled by using it.
 Activity
1. What were the
important concerns
in the minds of the
people according to
Sitaram and according
to Vishnubhatt?
2. What role did they
think the rulers were
playing? What role did
the sepoys seem to
play?
The Colonel sahib was of the opinion that the
excitement, which even he could not fail to see, would
pass off, as it had done before, and he recommended
me to go to my home.
Sitaram Pande, From Sepoy to Subedar, pp. 162-63.
A Mutiny Becomes a Popular Rebellion
Though struggles between rulers and the ruled are not
unusual, sometimes such struggles become quite
widespread as a popular resistance so that the power of
the state breaks down. A very large number of people
begin to believe that they have a common enemy and
rise up against the enemy at the same time. For such
a situation to develop people have to organise,
communicate, take initiative and display the confidence
to turn the situation around.
Such a situation developed in the northern parts of
India in 1857. After a hundred years of conquest and
administration, the English East India Company faced
a massive rebellion that started in May 1857 and
threatened the Company’s very presence in India.
Sepoys mutinied in several places beginning from
Meerut and a large number of people from different
sections of society rose up in rebellion. Some regard it
as the biggest armed resistance to colonialism in the
nineteenth century anywhere in the world.
Mutiny – When soldiers
as a group disobey their
officers in the army
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL
55Fig. 4 – The battle in the
cavalry lines
On the evening of 3 July
1857, over 3,000 rebels came
from Bareilly, crossed the
river Jamuna, entered Delhi,
and attacked the British
cavalry posts. The battle
continued all through
the night.
Firangis – Foreigners
The term reflects an
attitude of contempt.
56
OUR PASTS
– III
From Meerut to Delhi
On 29 March 1857, a young soldier, Mangal Pandey, was
hanged to death for attacking his officers in Barrackpore.
Some days later, some sepoys of the regiment at Meerut
refused to do the army drill using the new cartridges, which
were suspected of being coated with the fat of cows and
pigs. Eighty-five sepoys were dismissed from service and
sentenced to ten years in jail for disobeying their officers.
This happened on 9 May 1857.
The response of the other Indian soldiers in Meerut was
quite extraordinary. On 10 May, the soldiers marched to the
jail in Meerut and released the imprisoned sepoys. They
attacked and killed British officers. They captured guns and
ammunition and set fire to the buildings and properties of the
British and declared war on the firangis . The soldiers were
determined to bring an end to their rule in the country. But
who would rule the land instead? The soldiers had an answer
to this question – the Mughal emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar.
The sepoys of Meerut rode all night of 10 May to reach
Delhi in the early hours next morning. As news of their
arrival spread, the regiments stationed in Delhi also rose
up in rebellion. Again british officers were killed, arms
and ammunition seized, buildings set on fire. Triumphant
soldiers gathered around the walls of the Red Fort where
the Badshah lived, demanding to meet him. The emperor
was not quite willing to challenge the mighty British power
but the soldiers persisted. They forced their way into the
palace and proclaimed Bahadur Shah Zafar as their leader.The ageing emperor had to accept this demand. He wrote
letters to all the chiefs and rulers of the country to come
forward and organise a confederacy of Indian states to
fight the British. This single step taken by Bahadur Shah
had great implications.
The Mughal dynasty had ruled over a very large part of
the country. Most smaller rulers and chieftains controlled
different territories on behalf of the Mughal ruler.
Threatened by the expansion of British rule, many of them
felt that if the Mughal emperor could rule again, they too
would be able to rule their own territories once more, under
Mughal authority.
The British had not expected this to happen. They
thought the disturbance caused by the issue of the
cartridges would die down. But Bahadur Shah Zafar’s
decision to bless the rebellion changed the entire situation
dramatically. Often when people see an alternative
possibility they feel inspired and enthused. It gives them
the courage, hope and confidence to act.
The rebellion spreads
After the British were routed from Delhi, there was no
uprising for almost a week. It took that much time for
news to travel. Then, a spurt of mutinies began.
Regiment after regiment mutinied and took off to join
other troops at nodal points like Delhi, Kanpur and
Lucknow. After them, the people of the towns and villages
also rose up in rebellion and rallied around local leaders,
zamindars and chiefs who were prepared to establish their
authority and fight the British. Nana Saheb, the adopted son
of the late Peshwa Baji Rao who lived near Kanpur, gathered
armed forces and expelled the British garrison from the city.
He proclaimed himself Peshwa. He declared that he was a
governor under Emperor
Bahadur Shah Zafar. In
Lucknow, Birjis Qadr, the
son of the deposed Nawab
Wajid Ali Shah, was
proclaimed
the new
Nawab.
He
too
acknowledged the suzerainty
of Bahadur Shah Zafar. His
mother Begum Hazrat
Mahal took an active part
in organising the uprising
against the British. In
Jhansi, Rani Lakshmibai
joined the rebel sepoys and
Fig. 5 – As the mutiny
spread, British officers were
killed in the cantonments
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL
57 Activity fought the British along with Tantia Tope, the general of
Nana Saheb. In the Mandla region of Madhya Pradesh, Rani
Avantibai Lodhi of Ramgarh raised and led an army of four
thousand against the British who had taken over the
administration of her state.
The British were greatly outnumbered by the rebel forces.
They were defeated in a number of battles. This convinced
the people that the rule of the British had collapsed for good
and gave them the confidence to take the plunge and join
the rebellion. A situation of widespread popular rebellion
developed in the region of Awadh in particular. On 6 August
1857, we find a telegram sent by Lieutenant Colonel Tytler
to his Commander-in-Chief expressing the fear felt by the
British: “Our men are cowed by the numbers opposed to
them and the endless fighting. Every village is held against
us, the zamindars have risen to oppose us.”
Many new leaders came up. For example, Ahmadullah
Shah, a maulvi from Faizabad, prophesied that the rule of
the British would come to an end soon. He caught the
imagination of the people and raised a huge force of
supporters. He came to Lucknow to fight the British. In Delhi,
a large number of ghazis or religious warriors came together
to wipe out the white people. Bakht Khan, a soldier from
Bareilly, took charge of a large force of fighters who came to
Delhi. He became a key military leader of the rebellion. In
Bihar, an old zamindar, Kunwar Singh, joined the rebel
sepoys and battled with the British for many months. Leaders
and fighters from across the land joined the fight.
Fig. 6 – British forces
attack the rebels who had
occupied the Red Fort (on
the right) and Salimgarh
Fort in Delhi (on the left) The Company Fights Back
1. Why did the Mughal
emperor agree to
support the rebels?
2. Write a paragraph on
the assessment he
may have made before
accepting the offer of
the sepoys.
58
OUR PASTS
– III
Unnerved by the scale of the upheaval, the Company decided
to repress the revolt with all its might. It broughtreinforcements from England, passed new laws so
that the rebels could be convicted with ease, and then
moved into the storm centres of the revolt. Delhi was
recaptured from the rebel forces in September 1857. The
last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah Zafar was tried in
court and sentenced to life imprisonment. He and his
wife Begum Zinat Mahal were sent to prison in Rangoon
in October 1858. Bahadur Shah Zafar died in the Rangoon
jail in November 1862.
The recapture of Delhi, however, did not mean that the
rebellion died down after that. People continued to resist
and battle the British. The British had to fight for two
years to suppress the massive forces of popular rebellion.
Fig. 7 – The siege train
reaches Delhi
The British forces initially
found it difficult to break
through the heavy fortification
in Delhi. On 3 September
1857 reinforcements arrived –
a 7- mile-long siege train
comprising cartloads of
canons and ammunition pulled
by elephants.
Lucknow was taken in March 1858. Rani Lakshmibai
was defeated and killed in June 1858. A similar fate
awaited Rani Avantibai, who after initial victory in
Kheri, chose to embrace death when surrounded by the
British on all sides. Tantia Tope escaped to the jungles
of central India and continued to fight a guerrilla war
with the support of many tribal and peasant leaders.
He was captured, tried and killed in April 1859.
Just as victories against the British had earlier
encouraged rebellion, the defeat of rebel forces
encouraged desertions. The British also tried their best
to win back the loyalty of the people. They announced
rewards for loyal landholders would be allowed to
continue to enjoy traditional rights over their lands.
Those who had rebelled were told that if they submitted
to the British, and if they had not killed any white people,
 Activity
Make a list of places
where the uprising took
place in May, June and
July 1857.
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL
59Fig. 8 – British troops blow up
Kashmere Gate to enter Delhi
they would remain safe and their rights and claims to
land would not be denied. Nevertheless, hundreds of
sepoys, rebels, nawabs and rajas were tried and hanged.
Aftermath
Fig. 9 – British forces capture the
rebels near Kanpur
Notice the way the artist shows
the British soldiers valiantly
advancing on the rebel forces.
60
OUR PASTS
– III
The British had regained control
of the country by the end of 1859,
but they could not carry on ruling
the land with the same policies
any more.
Given below are the important
changes that were introduced by
the British.
1. The British Parliament passed
a new Act in 1858 and transferred
the powers of the East India Company
to the British Crown in order to
ensure a more responsible
management of Indian affairs. A
member of the British Cabinet was appointed Secretary of
State for India and made responsible for all matters related
to the governance of India. He was given a council to advise
him, called the India Council. The Governor-General of India
was given the title of Viceroy, that is, a personal
representative of the Crown. Through these measures the
British government accepted direct responsibility for
ruling India.2. All ruling chiefs of the country were assured that their
territory would never be annexed in future. They were allowed to
pass on their kingdoms to their heirs, including adopted sons.
However, they were made to acknowledge the British Queen as
their Sovereign Paramount. Thus the Indian rulers were to hold
their kingdoms as subordinates of the British Crown.
3. It was decided that the proportion of Indian soldiers in the
army would be reduced and the number of European soldiers would
be increased. It was also decided that instead of recruiting soldiers
from Awadh, Bihar, central India and south India, more soldiers
would be recruited from among the Gurkhas, Sikhs and Pathans.
4. The land and property of Muslims was confiscated on a large
scale and they were treated with suspicion and hostility. The British
believed that they were responsible for the rebellion in a big way.
5. The British decided to respect the customary religious and
social practices of the people in India.
6. Policies were made to protect landlords and zamindars
and give them security of rights over their lands.
Thus a new phase of history began after 1857.
• Main centres of the Revolt
• Other centres of the Revolt
Fig. 10 – Some
important centres of
the Revolt in North
India
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL
61ELSEWHERE
For a Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace
While the revolt was spreading in India
in 1857, a massive popular uprising
was raging in the southern parts of
China. It had started in 1850 and could
be suppressed only by the mid-1860s.
Thousands of labouring, poor people
were led by Hong Xiuquan to fight for
the establishment of the Heavenly
Kingdom of Great Peace. This was known
as the Taiping Rebellion.
Hong Xiuquan was a convert to
Christianity and was against the traditional
Fig. 11 – Taiping army meeting their leader
religions practised in China such as
Confucianism and Buddhism. The rebels of
Taiping wanted to establish a kingdom where a form of Christianity was practised, where no
one held any private property, where there was no difference between social classes and between
men and women, where consumption of opium, tobacco, alcohol, and activities like gambling,
prostitution, slavery, were prohibited.
The British and French armed forces operating in China helped the emperor of the Qing
dynasty to put down the Taiping Rebellion.
Let’s imagine
Imagine you are a
British officer in
Awadh during the
rebellion. What would
you do to keep your
plans of fighting the
rebels a top secret.
Let’s recall
1. What was the demand of Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi
that was refused by the British?
2. What did the British do to protect the interests of
those who converted to Christianity?
3. What objections did the sepoys have to the new
cartridges that they were asked to use?
4. How did the last Mughal emperor live the last years
of his life?
62
OUR PASTS
– IIIFig. 12 – Ruins of the Residency
in Lucknow
In June 1857, the rebel forces
began the siege of the Residency.
A large number of British women,
men and children had taken
shelter in the buildings there.
The rebels surrounded the
compound and bombarded the
building with shells. Hit by a
shell, Henry Lawrence, the Chief
Commissioner of Awadh, died in
one of the rooms that you see in
the picture. Notice how buildings
carry the marks of past events.
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL
63
6
Colonialism and the City
The Story of an Imperial Capital
What Happened to Cities Under Colonial
Rule?
You have seen how life in the countryside changed after the
establishment of British power. What happened to the cities
during the same period? The answer will depend on the
kind of town or city we are discussing. The history of a temple
town like Madurai will not be the same as that of a
manufacturing town like Dacca, or a port like Surat, or towns
that simultaneously served many different functions.
In most parts of the Western world modern cities emerged
with industrialisation. In Britain, industrial cities like Leeds
and Manchester grew rapidly in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, as more and more people sought jobs, housing and
other facilities in these places. However, unlike Western
Europe, Indian cities did not expand as rapidly in the
nineteenth century. Why was this so?
Fig. 1 – A view of
Machlipatnam, 1672
Machlipatnam
developed as an
important port town
in the seventeenth
century. Its importance
declined by the late
eighteenth century as
trade shifted to the
new British ports of
Bombay, Madras and
Calcutta.
64
OUR PASTS
– IIIIn the late eighteenth century, Calcutta, Bombay
and Madras rose in importance as Presidency cities.
They became the centres of British power in the different
regions of India. At the same time, a host of smaller
cities declined. Many towns manufacturing specialised
goods declined due to a drop in the demand for what
they produced. Old trading centres and ports could not
survive when the flow of trade moved to new centres.
Similarly, earlier centres of regional power collapsed
when local rulers were defeated by the British and
new centres of administration emerged. This process is
often described as de-urbanisation. Cities such as
Machlipatnam, Surat and Seringapatam were de-
urbanised during the nineteenth century. By the early
twentieth century, only 11 per cent of Indians were
living in cities.
The historic imperial city of Delhi became a dusty
provincial town in the nineteenth century before it was
rebuilt as the capital of British India after 1912. Let us
look at the story of Delhi to see what happened to it
under colonial rule.
How many ‘Delhis’ before New Delhi?
You know Delhi as the capital of modern India. Did you
also know that it has been a capital for more than a
1,000 years, although with some gaps? As many as 14
capital cities were founded in a small area of about 60
square miles on the left bank of the river Jamuna. The
remains of all other capitals may be seen on a visit to
the modern city-state of Delhi. Of these, the most
Presidency – For
administrative purposes,
colonial India was
divided into three
“Presidencies” (Bombay,
Madras and Bengal),
which developed from the
East India Company’s
“factories” (trading posts)
at Surat, Madras and
Calcutta.
Fig. 2 – Bombay port in the
eighteenth century
The city of Bombay began to
grow when the East India
Company started using Bombay
as its main port in western
India.
Urbanisation – The
process by which more
and more people begin
to reside in towns and
cities
COLONIALISM AND THE CITY
65Fig. 3 – Image of Shahjahanabad in the mid-nineteenth century, The Illustrated London News,16 January 1858
You can see the Red Fort on the left. Notice the walls that surround the city. Through the centre runs
the main road of Chandni Chowk. Note also the river Jamuna is flowing near the Red Fort. Today it has
shifted course. The place where the boat is about to embank is now known as Daryaganj ( darya means
river, ganj means market)
Dargah – The tomb of a
Sufi saint
Khanqah – A sufi lodge,
often used as a rest
house for travellers and
a place where people
come to discuss
spiritual matters, get
the blessings of saints,
and hear sufi music
Idgah – An open prayer
place of Muslims primarily
meant for id prayers
Cul-de-sac – Street with
a dead end
66
OUR PASTS
– III
important are the capital cities built between the twelfth
and seventeenth centuries.
The most splendid capital of all was built by Shah
Jahan. Shahjahanabad was begun in 1639 and consisted
of a fort-palace complex and the city adjoining it. Lal
Qila or the Red Fort, made of red sandstone, contained
the palace complex. To its west lay the Walled City with
14 gates. The main streets of Chandni Chowk and Faiz
Bazaar were broad enough for royal processions to pass.
A canal ran down the centre of Chandni Chowk.
Set amidst densely packed mohallas and several
dozen bazaars, the Jama Masjid was among the largest
and grandest mosques in India. There was no place higher
than this mosque within the city then.
Delhi during Shah Jahan’s time was also an important
centre of Sufi culture. It had several dargahs, khanqahs
and idgahs . Open squares, winding lanes, quiet cul-de-
sacs and water channels were the pride of Delhi’s
residents. No wonder the poet Mir Taqi Mir said, “Thestreets of Delhi aren’t mere
streets; they are like the album
of a painter.”
Yet, even this was no ideal
city, and its delights were enjoyed
only by some. There were sharp
divisions between rich and
poor. Havelis or mansions were
interspersed with the far more
numerous mud houses of the
poor. The colourful world of poetry
and dance was usually enjoyed
only by men. Furthermore,
celebrations and processions
often led to serious conflicts.
Fig. 4 – The eastern gate of the
Jama Masjid in Delhi, by Thomas
Daniell, 1795
This is also the first mosque in
India with minarets and full
domes.
Source 1
“Dilli jo ek shahr tha
alam mein intikhab...”
Fig. 5 – The shrine of Nizamuddin Auliya in Delhi
The Making of New Delhi
In 1803, the British gained control of Delhi after
defeating the Marathas. Since the capital of British
India was Calcutta, the Mughal emperor was allowed
to continue living in the palace complex in the Red
Fort. The modern city as we know it today developed
only after 1911 when Delhi became the capital of
British India.
Demolishing a past
Before 1857, developments in Delhi were somewhat
different from those in other colonial cities. In Madras,
Bombay or Calcutta, the living spaces of Indians and
the British were sharply separated. Indians lived in
By 1739, Delhi had been
sacked by Nadir Shah and
plundered many times.
Expressing the sorrow of
those who witnessed the
decline of the city, the
eighteenth-century Urdu
poet Mir Taqi Mir, said:
Dilli jo ek shahr tha alam
mein intikhab,
...
Ham rahne wale hain usi
ujre dayar ke
(I belong to the same
ruined territory of
Delhi, which was once
a supreme city in the
world)
COLONIALISM AND THE CITY
67Gulfaroshan – A festival
of flowers
Renaissance – Literally,
rebirth of art and
learning. It is a term
often used to describe a
time when there is great
creative activity.
the “black” areas, while the British lived in well-laid-
out “white” areas. In Delhi, especially in the first half
of the nineteenth century, the British lived along with
the wealthier Indians in the Walled City. The British
learned to enjoy Urdu/Persian culture and poetry and
participated in local festivals.
The establishment of the Delhi College in 1792 led
to a great intellectual flowering in the sciences as well
as the humanities, largely in the Urdu language. Many
refer to the period from 1830 to 1857 as a period of the
Delhi renaissance.
All this changed after 1857. During the Revolt that
year, as you have seen, the rebels gathered in the city,
and persuaded Bahadur Shah to become the leader of
the uprising. Delhi remained under rebel control for
four months.
Fig. 6 – British forces wreaking
vengeance on the streets of Delhi,
massacring the rebels.
Source 2
“There was once a
city of this name”
Ghalib lamented the
changes
that
were
occurring and wrote sadly
about the past that was
lost. He wrote:
What can I write?
The life of Delhi
depends on the Fort,
Chandni Chowk, the
daily gatherings at
the Jamuna Bridge
and the Annual
Gulfaroshan. When all
these ... things are no
longer there, how can
Delhi live? Yes, there
was once a city of this
name in the dominions
of India.
68
OUR PASTS
– III
When the British regained the city, they embarked
on a campaign of revenge and plunder. The famous poet
Ghalib witnessed the events of the time. This is how
he described the ransacking of Delhi in 1857: “When
the angry lions (the British) entered the town, they
killed the helpless ... and burned houses. Hordes of men
and women, commoners and noblemen, poured out of
Delhi from the three gates and took shelter in small
communities, and tombs outside the city.” To prevent
another rebellion, the British exiled Bahadur Shah to
Burma (now Myanmar), dismantled his court, razed
several of the palaces, closed down gardens and built
barracks for troops in their place.The British wanted Delhi to forget its Mughal past.
The area around the Fort was completely cleared of
gardens, pavilions and mosques (though temples were
left intact). The British wanted a clear ground for
security reasons. Mosques in particular were either
destroyed, or put to other uses. For instance, the Zinat-
al-Masjid was converted into a bakery. No worship was
allowed in the Jama Masjid for five years. One-third of
the city was demolished, and its canals were filled up.
In the 1870s, the western walls of Shahjahanabad
were broken to establish the railway and to allow the
city to expand beyond the walls. The British now began
living in the sprawling Civil Lines area that came up in
the north, away from the Indians in the Walled City.
The Delhi College was turned into a school, and shut
down in 1877.
Fig. 7 – Looking out from Jama
Masjid, photograph by Felice
Beato, 1858-59
Notice the buildings all around
the Masjid. They were cleared
after the Revolt of 1857.
Fig. 8 – View from the Jama
Masjid after the surrounding
buildings were demolished
 Activity
Compare the view in
Fig. 8 with that in Fig. 7.
Write a paragraph on
what the changes
depicted in the pictures
might have meant to
people living in the area.
COLONIALISM AND THE CITY
69Planning a new capital
Fig. 9 – The Coronation Durbar of
King George V, 12 December, 1911
Over 100,000 Indian princes and
British officers and soldiers
gathered at the Durbar.
.
Fig. 10 – The Viceregal Palace
(Rashtrapati Bhavan) atop
Raisina Hill
70
OUR PASTS
– III
The British were fully aware of the symbolic importance
of Delhi. After the Revolt of 1857, many spectacular
events were held there. In 1877, Viceroy Lytton organised
a Durbar to acknowledge Queen
Victoria as the Empress of India.
Remember that Calcutta was still
the capital of British India, but
the grand Durbar was being held
in Delhi. Why was this so?
During the Revolt, the British
had realised that the Mughal
emperor was still important to
the people and they saw him
as their leader. It was therefore
important to celebrate British
power with pomp and show in
the city the Mughal emperors
had earlier ruled, and the place which had turned into a
rebel stronghold in 1857.
In 1911, when King George V was crowned in England,
a Durbar was held in Delhi to celebrate the occasion.
The decision to shift the capital of India from Calcutta
to Delhi was announced at this Durbar.
New Delhi was constructed as a 10-square-mile city
on Raisina Hill, south of the existing city. Two architects,
Edward Lutyens and Herbert Baker, were called on to
design New Delhi and its buildings. The government
complex in New Delhi consisted of a two-mile avenue,Kingsway (now Rajpath), that led to the Viceroy’s Palace
(now Rashtrapati Bhavan), with the Secretariat buildings
on either sides of the avenue. The features of these
government buildings were borrowed from different periods
of India’s imperial history, but the overall look was Classical
Greece (fifth century BCE ). For instance, the central dome of
the Viceroy’s Palace was copied from the Buddhist stupa at
Sanchi, and the red sandstone and carved screens or jalis
were borrowed from Mughal architecture. But the new
buildings had to assert British importance: that is why the
architect made sure that the Viceroy’s Palace was higher
than Shah Jahan’s Jama Masjid!
How was this to be done?
New Delhi took nearly 20 years to build. The idea was
to build a city that was a stark contrast to Shahjahanabad.
There were to be no crowded mohallas, no mazes of narrow
bylanes. In New Delhi, there were to be broad, straight
streets lined with sprawling mansions set in the middle
of large compounds. The architects wanted New Delhi to
represent a sense of law and order, in contrast to the
chaos of Old Delhi. The new city also had to be a clean
and healthy space. The British saw overcrowded spaces
as unhygienic and unhealthy, the source of disease. This
meant that New Delhi had to have better water supply,
sewage disposal and drainage facilities than the Old City.
It had to be green, with trees and parks ensuring fresh air
and adequate supply of oxygen.
 Activity
Imagine yourself
walking up Raisina
Hill, looking towards
Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Do you think Baker
was right in thinking
that looking up to
the building would
create a sense of
awe and emphasise
the power of the
British?
Source 3
The vision of New Delhi
This is how Viceroy Hardinge explained the choice of Delhi
as capital:
The change would strike the imagination of the people of
India ... and would be accepted by all as the assertion of an
unfaltering determination to maintain British rule in India.
The architect Herbert Baker believed:
The New Capital must be the sculptural monument of the
good government and unity which India, for the first time
in its history, has enjoyed under British rule. British rule in
India is not a mere veneer of government and culture. It is
a new civilisation in growth, a blend of the best elements of
East and West ... It is to this great fact that the architecture
of Delhi should bear testimony. (2 October 1912)
 Activity
Can you find at
least two
instances from
this chapter that
suggest that there
were other ways
of thinking about
the image of the
capital city?
COLONIALISM AND THE CITY
71Life in the time of Partition
Fig. 11 – Thousands stayed in
the refugee camps set up in Delhi
after Partition.
72
OUR PASTS
– III
The Partition of India in 1947 led to a massive transfer
of populations on both sides of the new border. As a
result, the population of Delhi swelled, the kinds of
jobs people did changed, and the culture of the city
became different.
Days after Indian Independence and Partition, fierce
rioting began. Thousands of people in Delhi were killed
and their homes looted and burned. As streams of
Muslims left Delhi for Pakistan, their place was taken
by equally large numbers of Sikh and Hindu refugees
from Pakistan. Refugees roamed the streets of
Shahjahanabad, searching for empty homes to occupy.
At times they forced Muslims to leave or sell their
properties. Over two-thirds of the Delhi Muslims
migrated, almost 44,000 homes were abandoned.
Terrorised Muslims lived in makeshift camps till they
could leave for Pakistan.
At the same time, Delhi became a city of refugees.
Nearly 500,000 people were added to Delhi’s population
(which had a little over 800,000 people in 1951). Most
of these migrants were from Punjab. They stayed in
camps, schools, military barracks and gardens, hoping
to build new homes. Some got the opportunity to occupy
residences that had been vacated; others were housed
in refugee colonies. New colonies such as Lajpat Nagar
and Tilak Nagar came up at this time. Shops and stalls
were set up to cater to the demands of the migrants;
schools and colleges were also opened.
The skills and occupations of the refugees were
quite different from those of the people they replaced.
Many of the Muslims who went to Pakistan were
artisans, petty traders and labourers.
The new migrants coming to Delhi
were rural landlords, lawyers, teachers,
traders and small shopkeepers.
Partition changed their lives, and their
occupations. They had to take up new
jobs as hawkers, vendors, carpenters
and ironsmiths. Many, however,
prospered in their new businesses.
The large migration from Punjab
changed the social milieu of Delhi.
An urban culture largely based on Urdu
was overshadowed by new tastes and
sensibilities, in food, dress and the arts.Inside the Old City
Meanwhile, what happened to the old city, that had
been Shahjahanabad? In the past, Mughal Delhi’s famed
canals had brought not only fresh drinking water to
homes, but also water for other domestic uses. This
excellent system of water supply and drainage was
neglected in the nineteenth century. The system of wells
(or baolis ) also broke down,
and channels to remove
household waste (called
effluents) were damaged.
This was at a time when the
population of the city was
continuously growing.
The broken-down canals
could not serve the needs
of this rapidly increasing
population. At the end of
the nineteenth century, the
Shahjahani drains were
closed and a new system of
open surface drains was
introduced. This system too was soon overburdened,
and many of the wealthier inhabitants complained
about the stench from roadside privies and overflowing
open drains. The Delhi Municipal Committee was
unwilling to spend money on a good drainage system.
At the same time, though, millions of rupees were
being spent on drainage systems in the New Delhi area.
Fig. 12 – A famous baoli near the
shrine of Nizamuddin Auliya in
Delhi
Fig. 13 – Chandni Chowk in
Delhi in the late nineteenth century
COLONIALISM AND THE CITY
73 Activity
The decline of havelis
Think of the life of two
young people – one
growing up in a haveli
and the other in a
colonial bungalow.
What would be the
difference in their
relationship with the
family? Which would
you prefer to live in?
Discuss your views with
your classmates, and
give reasons for your
choice.
Amir – A nobleman
Fig. 14 – A colonial bungalow in
New Delhi
74
OUR PASTS
– III
The Mughal aristocracy in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries lived in grand mansions called
havelis. A map of the mid-nineteenth century showed
at least a hundred such havelis, which were large walled
compounds with mansions, courtyards and fountains.
A haveli housed many families. On entering the
haveli through a beautiful gateway, you reached an
open courtyard, surrounded by public rooms meant for
visitors and business, used exclusively by males. The
inner courtyard with its pavilions and rooms was meant
for the women of the household. Rooms in the havelis
had multiple uses, and very little by way of furniture.
Even in the mid-nineteenth century Qamr-al-din
Khan’s haveli had several structures within it, and
included housing for the cart drivers, tent pitchers,
torchbearers, as well as for accountants, clerks and
household servants.
Many of the Mughal amirs were unable to maintain
these large establishments under conditions of British
rule. Havelis therefore began to be subdivided and
sold. Often the street front of the havelis became shops
or warehouses. Some havelis were taken over by the
upcoming mercantile class, but many fell into decay
and disuse.
The colonial bungalow was quite different from the
haveli. Meant for one nuclear family, it was a large single-
storeyed structure with a pitched roof, and usually set
in one or two acres of open ground. It had separate living
and dining rooms and bedrooms, and a wide verandarunning in the front, and sometimes
on three sides. Kitchens, stables and
servants’ quarters were in a separate
space from the main house. The house
was run by dozens of servants. The
women of the household often sat on
the verandas to supervise tailors or
other tradesmen.
The Municipality begins to plan
The census of 1931 revealed that the
walled city area was horribly crowded
with as many as 90 persons per
acre, while New Delhi had only about
3 persons per acre.
The poor conditions in the Walled
City, however, did not stop it from
expanding. In 1888 an extension
scheme called the Lahore Gate
Improvement Scheme was planned
by Robert Clarke for the Walled City
residents. The idea was to draw
residents away from the Old City to a
new type of market square, around
which shops would be built. Streets
in this redevelopment strictly followed
the grid pattern, and were of identical
width, size and character. Land was divided into
regular areas for the construction of neighbourhoods.
Clarkegunj, as the development was called, remained
incomplete and did not help to decongest the Old City.
Even in 1912, water supply and drainage in these new
localities was very poor.
The Delhi Improvement Trust was set up 1936, and
it built areas like Daryaganj South for wealthy Indians.
Houses were grouped around parks. Within the houses,
space was divided according to new rules of privacy.
Instead of spaces being shared by many families or
groups, now different members of the same family had
their own private spaces within the home.
Fig. 15 – A street in Old Delhi
COLONIALISM AND THE CITY
75ELSEWHERE
Herbert Baker in South Africa
If you look at
Fig.16 and Fig.17
you will find a
startling similarity
between the
buildings. But these
buildings are
continents apart.
What does this
show?
Fig. 16
In the early 1890s, a young English architect named Herbert
Fig. 17
Baker went to South Africa in search of work. It was in
South Africa that Baker came in touch with Cecil Rhodes,
the Governor of Cape Town, who inspired in Baker a love for the British empire and an
admiration for the architectural heritage of ancient Rome and Greece.
Fig. 17 shows the Union Building that Baker designed in the city of Pretoria in South Africa.
It used some of the elements of ancient classical architecture that Baker later included in his
plans of the Secretariat building in New Delhi. The Union Building was also located on a steep
hill as is the Secretariat Building in New Delhi (Fig. 16). Have you not noticed that people in
positions of power want to look down on others from above rather than up towards them
from below? The Union Building and the Secretariat were both built to house imperial offices.
Let’s imagine
Imagine that you are
a young man living
in Shahjahanabad
in 1700. Based on
the description of the
area in this chapter,
write an account of
your activities during
one day of your life.
Let’s recall
1. State whether true or false:
(a) In the Western world, modern cities grew with
industrialisation.
(b) Surat and Machlipatnam developed in the
nineteenth century.
(c) In the twentieth century, the majority of Indians
lived in cities.
(d) After 1857 no worship was allowed in the Jama
Masjid for five years.
(e) More money was spent on cleaning Old Delhi
than New Delhi.
76
OUR PASTS
– III2. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The first structure to successfully use the
dome was called the _____________.
(b) The two architects who designed New Delhi
and Shahjahanabad were _____________ and
_____________.
(c) The British saw overcrowded spaces as
_____________.
(d) In 1888 an extension scheme called the
_____________ was devised.
3. Identify three differences in the city design of
New Delhi and Shahjahanabad.
4. Who lived in the “white” areas in cities such as
Madras?
Let’s discuss
5. What is meant by de-urbanisation?
6. Why did the British choose to hold a grand Durbar
in Delhi although it was not the capital?
7. How did the Old City of Delhi change under British
rule?
8. How did the Partition affect life in Delhi?
Let’s do
9. Find out the history of the town you live in or of
any town nearby. Check when and how it grew,
and how it has changed over the years. You could
look at the history of the bazaars, the buildings,
cultural institutions, and settlements.
10. Make a list of at least ten occupations in the city,
town or village to which you belong, and find out
how long they have existed. What does this tell you
about the changes within this area?
COLONIALISM AND THE CITY
77Notes